<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>II: The Barrister's Story, Being the Decision of Sir Edward Shoreham</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch01.xhtml" title="I: The Actor's Story, Being the Patch on the Quilt"/><link rel="next" href="ch03.xhtml" title="III: The Doctor's Story, Being Sentence of Death"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="II: The Barrister's Story, Being the Decision of Sir Edward Shoreham" epub:type="chapter" id="id720"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">II: The Barrister's Story, Being the Decision of Sir Edward Shoreham</h1></div></div></div><p>"This morning," he began, leaning back in his chair and crossing his
legs, "I mislaid my cigarette–case. I knew it was somewhere in the
study, but find it I could not. Finally, having searched all over my
writing table, I rang the bell, and somewhat irritably demanded its
immediate production. The butler stepped forward and lifted it up from
the centre of the blotting pad, where it had been the whole time,
literally under my nose. What peculiar temporary kink in the brain had
prevented my noticing the very thing I was looking for, when it was
lying in the most conspicuous place in which it could possibly have
been, I don't know. I leave that to the Doctor. But the point of my
parable is this—it decided in my mind the story with which I should
bore you fellows to–night."</p><p>He paused to light a cigar, then he glanced round at the faces of the
other five.</p><p>"And if, as I get on with it, you think you recognise the real
characters under the fictional names I shall give them, I can't prevent
you. But don't ask me to confirm your thoughts."</p><p>"Exactly," murmured the Actor. "Fire ahead."</p><p>"It was about four years before the war," commenced the Barrister, "that
I was stopping for a few nights at a certain house in Park Lane. It was
in the middle of the season—June, to be accurate—and I was waiting to
get in here. My wife was in the country, and, as I was more or less at a
loose end, I accepted the offer of staying at this house. My
hostess—shall we call her Granger, Ruth Granger—had been an old school
pal of my wife's; in later years she had become a real, intimate friend
of us both.</p><p>"At the time of which I speak she was a lovely girl of twenty–six, with
the suffering of six years of hell in her eyes. At the age of twenty she
had married Sir Henry Granger, and that fatal mistake had been the cause
of the hell. Henry Granger was one of the most loathsome brutes it has
ever been my misfortune to run across. He had not one single instinct of
a gentleman in him, though he did happen to be the tenth baronet. How
her parents had ever allowed the marriage beat me completely. Perhaps it
was money, for Granger was rich; but whatever it was she married him,
and her hell began.</p><p>"Granger was simply an animal, a coarse and vicious animal. He drank
heavily without getting drunk, which is always a dangerous sign, and he
possessed the morals—or did not possess the morals, whichever you
prefer—of a monkey. He was unfaithful to her on their honeymoon—my
wife told me that; and from then on he made not the slightest attempt to
conceal his mode of life."</p><p>The Barrister carefully removed the ash from his cigar. "I won't labour
the point," he went on with a faint smile. "We have all of us met the
type, but I'd like to emphasise the fact that I, at any rate, have never
met any member of that type who came within a mile of him. Most of 'em
have some semblance of decency about 'em—make some attempt to conceal
their affairs. Granger didn't; he seemed to prefer that they should be
known. Sometimes since then I have wondered whether he was actuated by a
sort of blind rage—by a mad desire to pierce through the calm, icy
contempt of his wife; to make her writhe and suffer, because he realised
she was so immeasurably his superior." He paused thoughtfully. "He made
her suffer right enough."</p><p>"Did she never try for a divorce?" asked the Soldier.</p><p>"No, never. We discussed it once—she, and my wife and I; and I had to
explain to her our peculiar laws on the subject. His adultery by itself
was, of course, not sufficient, and for some reason she flatly refused
to consider a mere separation. She wouldn't face the scandal and
publicity for only that. I said to her then: 'Why not apply for a
restitution of conjugal rights. Get your husband to leave the house, and
if he doesn't return in fourteen days―'</p><p>"She stopped me with a bitter laugh.</p><p>"'It seems rather fatuous,' she said slowly, 'getting a lawyer to ask my
husband to do what he is only too ready to do—return to me.'</p><p>"'But surely,' I began, not quite taking her meaning.</p><p>"'You see, Bill,' she answered in a flat, dead voice, 'my husband is
very fond of me—as a stopgap. After most of his episodes he honours me
with his attentions for two or three days.'</p><p>"That was the devil of it—he didn't intend to let her divorce him. She
formed an excellent hostess for his house, and for the rest there were
always <span class="emphasis"><em>les autres</em></span>. And he wanted her, too, because he couldn't get
her, and that made him mad."</p><p>The Barrister leant forward, and the firelight flickered on his thin,
ascetic face.</p><p>"Such was the state of affairs when I went to stay. The particular lady
at the time who was being honoured by Henry Granger was a shining light
in musical comedy—Nelly Jones, shall we call her? It is very far from
her real name. If possible, he had been more open over this affair than
usual; everyone who knew the Grangers in London knew about
it—<span class="emphasis"><em>everyone</em></span>. He had twice dined with her at the same restaurant at
which his wife was entertaining, once deliberately selecting the next
table."</p><p>"What an unmitigated swine!" cried the Ordinary Man.</p><p>"He was," agreed the Barrister briefly. "But even that was not
sufficient to satisfy the gentleman. He proceeded to do a thing which
put him for ever outside the pale. He brought this girl to a reception
of his wife's at his own house.</p><p>"It was the night that I arrived. She had fixed up one of those ghastly
entertainments which are now, thank Heaven, practically extinct.
Somebody sings and nobody listens, and you meet everybody you
particularly want to avoid. Mercifully I ran into an old pal, also of
your calling, Actor–man—Violet Seymour. No reason why I should disguise
her name at any rate. She was not acting at the moment, and we sat in a
sort of alcove–place at the top of the stairs, on the same landing as
the reception–room.</p><p>"'There's going to be a break here soon, Bill,' she said to me after a
while. 'Ruth is going to snap.'</p><p>"'Poor girl!' I answered. 'But what the devil can one do, Violet?'</p><p>"'Nothing,' she said fiercely, 'except alter your abominably unjust
laws. Why can't she get a divorce, Bill? It's vile—utterly vile.'</p><p>"And then—well, let's call him Sir Edward Shoreham, joined us. He was
on the Bench—a judge, which makes the disguise of a false name pretty
thin, especially in view of what is to come. I remember he had recently
taken a murder case—one that had aroused a good deal of popular
attention—and the prisoner had been found guilty. We were talking about
it at the time Sir Edward arrived, with Violet, as usual, tilting lances
against every form of authority.</p><p>"I can see her now as she turned to Sir Edward with a sort of dreadful
fascination on her face.</p><p>"'And so you sentenced him to death?'</p><p>"He nodded gravely. 'Certainly,' he answered. 'He was guilty.'</p><p>"And then she turned half–away, speaking almost under her breath.</p><p>"'And doesn't it ever appall you? Make you wake in the middle of the
night, with your mouth dry and your throat parched. All this—life,
love—and in a cell, a man waiting—a man you've sent there. Ticking off
the days on his nerveless fingers—staring out at the sun. My God! it
would drive me mad.'</p><p>"Ned Shoreham smiled a little grimly.</p><p>"'You seem to forget one unimportant factor,' he answered; 'the wretched
woman that man killed.'</p><p>"'No, I don't,' she cried. 'But the punishment is so immeasurably worse
than the crime. I don't think death would matter if it came suddenly;
but to sit waiting with a sort of sickening helplessness―'</p><p>"It was then Ruth Granger joined us. Some woman was singing in the
reception–room and, for the moment, she was free from her duties as
hostess.</p><p>"'You seem very serious,' she said with her grave, sweet smile, holding
out her hand to Sir Edward.</p><p>"'Miss Seymour is a revolutionary,' he answered lightly, and I happened
at that moment to glance at Ruth. And for the moment she had let the
mask slip as she looked at Ned Shoreham's face. Then it was replaced,
but their secret was out, as far as I was concerned, though on matters
of affection I am the least observant of mortals. If they weren't in
love with one another, they were as near to it as made no odds. And it
gave me a bit of a shock.</p><p>"Shoreham was young—young, at any rate, for the Bench—and he was
unmarried. And somehow I couldn't fit Shoreham into the situation of
loving another man's wife. There had never been a breath of scandal that
I had heard; if there had been, it would have finished him for good. A
judge must be like Cæsar's wife. And Shoreham, even then, had
established a reputation for the most scrupulous observance of the law.
His enemies called him cruel and harsh; those who knew him better
realised that his apparent harshness was merely a cloak he had wrapped
tightly round himself as a guard against a naturally tender heart. I
don't know any man that I can think of who had such an undeviating idea
of duty as Shoreham, and without being in the least a prig, such an
exalted idea of the responsibilities of his position. And to realise
suddenly that he was in love with Ruth Granger, as I say, came as a
shock.</p><p>"'What was the argument about?' she said, sitting down beside me.</p><p>"'Morality <span class="emphasis"><em>versus</em></span> the Law,' chipped in Violet.</p><p>"'The individual <span class="emphasis"><em>versus</em></span> the community,' amended Sir Edward.
'Justice—real justice—against sickly sentimentality, with all due
deference to you, Miss Seymour. There are hard cases, one knows, but
hard cases make bad laws. There's been far too much lately of men taking
matters into their own hands—this so–called Unwritten Law. And it has
got to stop.'</p><p>"'You would never admit the justification,' said Ruth slowly.</p><p>"'Never—in any circumstances,' he answered. 'You have the law—then
appeal to the law. Otherwise there occurs chaos.'</p><p>"'And what of the cases where the law gives no redress?' demanded
Violet, and even as she spoke Granger came up the stairs with this girl
on his arm.</p><p>"Ruth Granger rose, deathly white, and gazed speechlessly at her
husband's coarse, sneering face. I don't think for a moment she fully
grasped the immensity of the insult; she was stunned. The footmen were
staring open–mouthed; guests passing into the supper–room stopped and
smirked. And then it was over; the tension snapped.</p><p>"'Have you had any supper, Sir Edward?' said Ruth calmly, and with her
hand on his arm she swept past her husband, completely ignoring both him
and the girl, who flushed angrily.</p><p>"'I suppose,' said Violet Seymour to me, as Granger and the girl went
into the reception–room, 'that had Ruth shot that filthy blackguard dead
on the stairs, Sir Edward would have piously folded his hands and, in
due course, sentenced her to death.'</p><p>"And at the moment I certainly sympathised with her point of view."</p><p>The Barrister got up and splashed some soda–water into a glass. Then he
continued:</p><p>"I won't weary you with an account of the rest of the reception. You can
imagine for yourselves the covert sneers and whisperings. I want to go
on two or three hours to the time when the guests had gone, and a
white–faced, tight–lipped woman was staring at the dying embers of a
fire in her sitting–room, while I stood by the mantelpiece wondering
what the devil to do to help. Granger was in his study, where he had
retired on the departure of Miss Jones, and I, personally, had seen two
bottles of champagne taken to him there by one of the footmen.</p><p>"'It's the end, Bill,' she said, looking at me suddenly, 'absolutely the
end. I can't go on—not after to–night. How dared he bring that woman
here? How dared he?'</p><p>"Violet had been right—the break had come. Ruth Granger was desperate,
and there was an expression on her face that it wasn't good to see. It
put the wind up me all right.</p><p>"'Go to bed, Ruth,' I said quietly. 'There's no good having a row with
Granger to–night; you can say what you want to say to–morrow.'</p><p>"And at that moment the door opened and her husband came in. As I said,
he was a man who never got drunk, but that night he was unsteady on his
legs. He stood by the door, swaying a little and staring at her with a
sneer on his face. He was a swine sober; in drink he was—well, words
fail. But, by God! you fellows, she got through him and into him until I
thought he was going to strike her. I believe that was what she was
playing for at the time, because I was there as a witness. But he
didn't, and when she finished flaying him he merely laughed in her face.</p><p>"'And what about your own damned lover, my virtuous darling?' he
sneered. 'What about the upright judge whom you adore—dear, kind Edward
Shoreham?'</p><p>"It was unexpected; she didn't know he had guessed—and her face gave
her away for a moment. Then she straightened up proudly.</p><p>"'Sir Edward Shoreham and I are on terms which an animal of your gross
mind couldn't possibly understand,' she answered coldly, and he laughed.
'If you insinuate that he is my lover in the accepted sense of the word,
you lie and you know it.'</p><p>"Without another word she walked contemptuously by him, and the door
closed behind her. And after a moment or two I followed her, leaving him
staring moodily at the empty grate. I couldn't have spoken to him
without being rude and, after all, I was under his roof."</p><p>The Barrister leant back in his chair and crossed his legs.</p><p>"Now that was the situation," he continued, "when I went to bed. My room
was almost opposite Lady Granger's, and at the end of the passage, which
was a cul–de–sac, was the door leading into Granger's study. I hadn't
started to undress when I heard him come past my room and go along the
passage to his study. And I was still thinking over the situation about
ten minutes later when Lady Granger's door opened. I knew it was hers
because I heard her speak to her maid, telling her to go to bed. The
girl said 'Good night,' and something—I don't quite know what—made me
look through the keyhole of my door. I was feeling uneasy and alarmed; I
suppose the scene downstairs had unsettled me. And sure enough, as soon
as the maid's footsteps had died away, I saw through my spy–hole Ruth
Granger go down the passage towards her husband's study. For a moment I
hesitated; an outsider's position is always awkward between husband and
wife. But one thing was very certain, those two were in no condition to
have another—and this time a private—interview. I opened my door
noiselessly and peered out. It struck me that if I heard things getting
too heated I should have to intervene. She was just opening the door of
his study as I looked along the passage, and then in a flash the whole
thing seemed to happen. The door shut behind her; there was a pause of
one—perhaps two seconds—and a revolver shot rang out, followed by the
sound of a heavy fall. For a moment I was stunned; then I raced along
the passage as hard as I could, and flung open the door of the study.</p><p>"On the floor lay Henry Granger, doubled up and sprawling, while in the
middle of the room stood his wife staring at him speechlessly. At her
feet on the carpet was a revolver, an automatic Colt. I stood there by
the door staring foolishly, and after a while she spoke.</p><p>"'There's been an accident,' she whispered. 'Is he dead?'</p><p>"I went up to the body and turned it over. Through the shirt front was a
small hole; underneath the left shoulder blade was another. Henry
Granger had been shot through the heart from point–blank range; death
must have been absolutely instantaneous.</p><p>"'My God, Ruth!' I muttered. 'How did it happen?'</p><p>"'Happen?' she answered vaguely. 'There was a man…the window.'</p><p>"And then she fainted. The butler, with a couple of footmen, by this
time had appeared at the door, and I pulled myself together.</p><p>"'Her ladyship's maid at once,' I said. 'Sir Henry has been shot. Ring
up a doctor, and ask him to come round immediately.'</p><p>"The butler rushed off, but I kept the two footmen.</p><p>"'Wait a moment,' I cried, picking up the revolver. 'A man did it. Pull
back the two curtains by the window, and I'll cover him.'</p><p>"They did as I told them, pulled back the two heavy black curtains that
were in front of the window. It was set back in a sort of alcove, and I
had the revolver ready pointed to cover the murderer. I covered empty
air; there was no one there. Then I walked over to the window and looked
out. It was wide open, and there was a sheer drop of forty feet to the
deserted area below. I looked upwards—I looked sideways: plain
brickwork without footing for a cat."</p><p>"'Go down to the room below,' I cried; 'he may have got in there.'</p><p>"They rushed away to come back and tell me that not only were the
windows bolted, but that they were shuttered as well. And I thought they
looked at me curiously."</p><p>He paused to relight his cigar; then he continued thoughtfully:</p><p>"I don't quite know when I first began to feel suspicious about this
mysterious man. The thing had been so sudden that for a while my brain
refused to work; then gradually my legal training reasserted itself, and
I started to piece things together. Ruth had come–to again, and I put
one or two questions to her. She was still very dazed, but she answered
them quite coherently:</p><p>"A man in evening clothes—at least, she thought he had on evening
clothes—had been in the room as she came in. She heard a shot; the
light went out and the window was thrown up. And then she had turned on
the light just before I came in to see her husband lying dead on the
floor. She knew no more. I suppose I must have looked a bit thoughtful,
for she suddenly got up from her chair and came up to me.</p><p>"'You believe me, Bill, don't you?' she said, staring at me.</p><p>"'Of course, of course,' I answered hurriedly. 'Go and lie down now,
Ruth, because we shall have to send for the police.'</p><p>"Without another word she left the room with her maid, and, after
telling the footmen to wait downstairs till they were wanted, I sat down
to think. Now, this isn't a detective story; such as it is, it concerns
a more interesting study than the mere detection of crime. It concerns
the struggle in the soul of an upright man between love and duty. And
the man was Sir Edward Shoreham.</p><p>"Unknown to me she sent for him—asked him to come at once—and he came.
He was shown by the butler into the study, where I was still sitting at
the desk, and he stopped motionless by the door staring at the body,
which had not been moved. I was waiting for the doctor, and I got up
surprised.</p><p>"'The butler told me he had been shot,' he said a little jerkily. 'How
did it happen?'</p><p>"'I wasn't expecting you, Sir Edward,' I answered slowly. 'But I'm glad
that you've come. I'd like another opinion.'</p><p>"'What do you mean?' he cried. 'Is there any mystery?'</p><p>"'I'll tell you exactly what happened as far as I know the facts,' I
said. 'Lady Granger and her husband had a very bad quarrel to–night.
Then she came to bed, and so did I. Shortly afterwards her husband came
along into this room. Now, my bedroom is in the passage you have just
come along, and about ten minutes after Sir Henry came in here, his wife
followed him. I opened my door, because I was afraid they might start
quarrelling again, and he had been drinking. I saw her come in; there
was a pause, and then a revolver shot rang out.'</p><p>"'Was this door shut?' he snapped.</p><p>"'Yes,' I answered, 'it was. I rushed along the passage and came in. I
found her standing, with the revolver at her feet, staring at her
husband, who was lying where he is now. She said: 'There's been an
accident.' And then she muttered something about a man and the window
before she fainted. I went to the window, and there was no one there. I
looked out; will you do the same?'</p><p>"I waited while he walked over and looked out, and after what seemed an
interminable time he came back again.</p><p>"'How long was it after the shot before you looked out?' His voice was
very low as he asked the question.</p><p>"'Not a quarter of a minute,' I answered, and we both stood staring at
one another in silence.</p><p>"'Good God!' he said at length, 'what are you driving at?'</p><p>"'I'm not driving at anything, Sir Edward,' I answered. 'At least, I'm
trying not to drive at it. But the man is dead, and the police must be
sent for. What are we going to say?'</p><p>"'The truth, of course,' he answered instantly.</p><p>"'Quite,' I said slowly. 'But what is the truth?'</p><p>"He turned very white, and leant against one of the old suits of armour,
of which the dead man had a wonderful collection all over the house.</p><p>"'Did Lady Granger see this man go out of the window?' he asked at
length.</p><p>"'No, she only heard him open it. You see, she says he switched off the
light. It was on when I rushed in.'</p><p>"'A rope,' he suggested.</p><p>"'Impossible in the time,' I said; 'utterly impossible. Such a
suggestion would be laughed out of court.'</p><p>"He came over and sat down heavily in a chair, and his face was haggard.</p><p>"'Sir Edward,' I went on desperately, 'the doctor will be here shortly;
the police must be sent for. We've got to decide something. This man
didn't go out by the door or I'd have seen him; only a fly could have
gone out by the window. We've got to face the facts.'</p><p>"'You don't believe there was a man here at all,' he said slowly.</p><p>"'Heaven help me! I don't,' I answered. 'It's all so easy to
reconstruct. The poor girl was driven absolutely desperate by what
happened to–night, and by the last thing he said to her after their
quarrel.' I looked at him for a moment before going on. 'He accused her
of being in love with you.' I said it deliberately, and he caught his
breath sharply.</p><p>"'Can't you see it all?' I continued. 'She came in here, and she shot
him; and when she'd done it her nerves gave, and she said the first
thing to me that came into her head.'</p><p>"'If you're right,' he said heavily, 'it means that Ruth will be tried
for murder!' He got up with his hands to his temples. 'My God!
Stratton,' he cried, 'this is awful. Premeditated murder, too—not done
blindly in the middle of a quarrel, but a quarter of an hour after it
was over.'</p><p>"'That's how it would strike a jury,' I answered gravely.</p><p>"'Supposing she had done it suddenly, blindly'—he was talking half to
himself—'snatched the revolver off the table as he tried to make love
to her, let's say.' And then he stopped and stared at me.</p><p>"'Supposing that had happened, it would be better for her to say so at
once,' I said.</p><p>"'But it didn't happen,' he answered; 'it couldn't have.'</p><p>"'No,' I agreed. 'It didn't happen; it couldn't have. But supposing it
had, Sir Edward, what then?'</p><p>"'Stop, Stratton,' he cried. 'For Heaven's sake, stop!'</p><p>"'There's no good stopping,' I said. 'We haven't any time for argument.
Your legal knowledge has suggested the same solution as occurred to me.
If <span class="emphasis"><em>now</em></span>, at once, when we send for the police, she says it was an
accident—gives a complete story, chapter and verse―'</p><p>"'Invents it, you mean,' he interrupted.</p><p>"'Call it what you like,' I said, 'but, unless she does that and
substantiates the story, she will be tried for the premeditated and
wilful murder of her husband. She'll have to be tried anyway, but if she
makes a voluntary confession—makes a story out of it that will appeal
to sentiment—they will acquit her. It's the only chance.'</p><p>"'But it's monstrous, man,' he muttered—only now his eyes were fixed on
me questioningly.</p><p>"'Look here, Sir Edward,' I said, 'let's discuss this matter calmly.
Humanly speaking, we know what happened. Ruth came along that passage,
opened this door, and shot her husband dead through the heart—that is
the case as I should put it to the jury, the plain issue shorn of all
its trappings. What is going to be the verdict?'</p><p>"Shoreham plucked at his collar as if he were fighting for breath.</p><p>"'If, on the other hand, the shot was not immediate—and I am the only
witness as to that; if I had heard his voice raised in anger; if he had
sprung at her, tried to kiss her, and she blindly, without thought, had
snatched up the first thing that came to her hand, the revolver, not
even knowing it was loaded—what then? The servants can be squared. She
was talking wildly when she mentioned this man—didn't know what she was
saying. And then, when she got back to her room she realised that the
truth was best, and rang you up, a Judge. What better possible proof
could any jury have of her desire to conceal nothing? And you with your
reputation on the Bench―'</p><p>"'Ah, don't, don't!' he cried hoarsely. 'You're driving me mad!
You're—you're―!'</p><p>"'Why, Ned, what's the matter?'</p><p>"We both swung round. Ruth had come in, unnoticed by us, and was staring
at Shoreham with wonder in her eyes. Then, with a shudder, she stepped
past her husband's body and came into the room.</p><p>"'They've just told me you were here,' she said, and then she gave a
little cry. 'Ned, why are you looking like that? Ned! you don't
think—you don't think I did it?'</p><p>"She cowered back, looking first at him and then at me.</p><p>"'You <span class="emphasis"><em>can't</em></span> think I did it,' she whispered. 'I tell you there was a
man here—the man who shot him. Oh! they'll believe me, won't they?'</p><p>"'Ruth,' I said, 'I want you to realise that we're both of us your
friends.' Which is the sort of fatuous remark one does make when the
tension is a bit acute. She never even glanced at me as I spoke; with a
sort of sick horror in her eyes, she was staring at Shoreham, and I
blundered on: 'When you talked about this man you were
unnerved—distraught; you didn't know what you were saying. We both
realise that. But now we've got to think of the best way of—of helping
you. You see, the police must be sent for—we ought to have sent for
them sooner—and―'</p><p>"She walked past me and went over to Shoreham.</p><p>"'Do you believe I did it, Ned?' she said quietly. 'If I swear to you
that I didn't—would that convince you?'</p><p>"'But, Ruth,' he cried desperately, 'it isn't me you've got to
convince—it's the police. A man couldn't have got out of that window in
the time. It's a physical impossibility. If you told it to the police,
they'd laugh. Tell us the truth, my dear. I beseech you. Tell us the
truth, and we'll see what can be done.'</p><p>"She stood very still, with her hands clenched by her sides. And then
quite deliberately she spoke to Shoreham.</p><p>"'If you don't believe there was a man here,' she said, 'you <span class="emphasis"><em>must</em></span>
think I shot my husband. There was no one else who could have done it.
Well—supposing I did. You acknowledge no justification for such an
act?'</p><p>"I started to speak, but she silenced me with an imperative wave of her
hand.</p><p>"'Please, Bill―Well, Ned—I'm waiting. If I did shoot him—what
then?'"</p><p>The Barrister paused to relight his cigar, and the others waited in
silence.</p><p>"She was staring at Shoreham," he went on after a while, "with a faint,
half–mocking, wholly tender smile on her lips, and if either he or I had
been less dense that smile should have made us think. But at the moment
I was absorbed in the problem of how to save her; while she was absorbed
in a very different one concerning the mentality of the man she cared
for. And Shoreham—well, he was absorbed in the old, old fight between
love and duty, and the fierceness of the struggle was showing on his
face.</p><p>"There in front of him stood the woman he loved, the woman who had just
shot her husband, and the woman who was now free for him to marry. He
knew as well as I did that in adopting the line I had suggested lay the
best chance of getting her acquitted. He knew as well as I did that the
vast majority of juries would acquit if the story were put to them as we
had outlined it. He could visualise as well as I the scene in court.
Counsel for the defence—I'd already fixed on Grayson in my mind as her
counsel—outlining the whole scene: her late husband's abominable
conduct culminating in this final outrage at her reception. And then as
he came to the moment of the tragedy, I could picture him turning to the
jury with passionate sincerity in his face—appealing to them as
men—happily married, perhaps, but men, at any rate, to whom home life
was sacred.</p><p>"I could hear his voice—low and earnest—as he sketched for them that
last scene. This poor, slighted, tormented woman—girl, gentlemen, for
she is little more than a girl—went in desperation to the man—well, he
is dead now, and we will leave it at that—to the man who had made her
life a veritable hell. She pleaded with him, gentlemen, to allow her to
divorce him—pleaded for some remnant of decent feelings in him. And
what was his answer—what was the answer of this devil who was her
husband? Did he meet her half–way? Did he profess the slightest sorrow
for his despicable conduct?</p><p>"No, gentlemen—not one word. His sole response was to spring at her in
his drunken frenzy and endeavour to fix his vile attentions on her. And
she, mad with terror and fright, snatched up the revolver which was
lying on the desk. It might have been a ruler—anything; she was not
responsible at the moment for what she did. Do you blame her, gentlemen?
You have daughters of your own. She no more knew what she had in her
hand than a baby would. To keep him away—that was her sole idea. And
then—suddenly—it happened. The revolver went off—the man fell dead.</p><p>"What did this girl do, gentlemen, after that? Realising that he was
dead, did she make any attempt to conceal what she had done—to conceal
her share in the matter? No—exactly the reverse. Instantly she rang up
Sir Edward Shoreham, whose views on such matters are well known to you
all. And then and there she told him everything—concealing nothing,
excusing nothing. Sir Edward Shoreham of all people, who, with due
deference to such a distinguished public man, has at times been regarded
as—well—er—not lenient in his judgments. And you have heard what Sir
Edward said in the box…."</p><p>Once again the Barrister paused and smiled faintly.</p><p>"I'd got as far as that, you see, before Shoreham answered her. And he
had got as far as that, too, I think. He saw it all, built on a
foundation of lies—built on the foundation of his dishonour. No one
would ever know except us three—but that doesn't make a thing easier
for the Edward Shorehams of the world.</p><p>"And then he spoke—in a low, tense voice:</p><p>"'If you shot him, dear,' he said, 'nothing matters save getting you
off.'</p><p>"Some people," pursued the Barrister, "might call it a victory—some
people would call it a defeat. Depends on one's outlook; depends on how
much one really believes in the 'Could not love you half so much, loved
I not honour more' idea. But certainly the murderer himself was very
pleased."</p><p>"The murderer?" cried the Ordinary Man sitting up suddenly.</p><p>"The murderer," returned the Barrister. "That's why I mentioned about my
cigarette–case this morning. He had been standing behind the suit of
armour in the corner the whole time. He came out suddenly, and we all
stared at him speechlessly, and then he started coughing—a dreadful
tearing cough—which stained his handkerchief scarlet.</p><p>"'I must apologise,' he said when he could speak, 'but there was another
thing besides shooting Granger that I wanted to do before I died. That
was why I didn't want to be caught to–night. However, a man must cough
when he's got my complaint. But I'm glad I restrained myself long enough
to hear your decision, Sir Edward. I congratulate you on it.'</p><p>"'You scoundrel!' began Shoreham, starting forward, 'why didn't you
declare yourself sooner?'</p><p>"'Because there's another thing I wanted to do,' he repeated wearily.
'In Paris, in the Rue St. Claire, there lives a woman. She was beautiful
once—to me she is beautiful now. She was <span class="emphasis"><em>my</em></span> woman until―' And his
eyes sought the dead body of Henry Granger.</p><p>"Ruth took a deep breath. 'Yes—until?' she whispered.</p><p>"'Until he came,' said the man gravely. 'And God will decide between him
and me. But I would have liked to look on her once more, and hold her
hand, and tell her, yet again, that I understood—absolutely.'</p><p>"It was then Ruth Granger crossed to him.</p><p>"'What is her name and the number of the house?' she said.</p><p>"'Sybil Deering is her name,' he answered slowly, 'and the number is
fourteen.'</p><p>"'Will you leave it to me?' she asked.</p><p>"For a moment he stared at her in silence, then he bowed.</p><p>"'From the bottom of my heart I thank you, Lady Granger, and I hope you
will have all the happiness you deserve.' He glanced at Shoreham and
smiled. 'When a man loves everything else goes to the wall, doesn't it?
Remember that in the future, Sir Edward, when they're standing before
you, wondering, trying to read their fate. Someone loves them, just as
you love her.'"</p><p>The Barrister rose and drained his glass.</p><p>"And that is the conclusion of your suffering," he remarked.</p><p>"Was the man hanged?" asked the Soldier.</p><p>"No, he died a week later of galloping consumption."</p><p>"And what of the other two?" demanded the Actor.</p><p>"They married, and are living happily together to–day, doing fruit
farming as a hobby."</p><p>"Fruit farming!" echoed the Doctor. "Why fruit farming?"</p><p>"Something to do," said the Barrister. "You see, Sir Edward has never
tried another case. Some men are made that way."</p></section><footer/></body></html>