<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>V: The Soldier's Story, Being a Bit of Orange Peel</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch04.xhtml" title="IV: The Ordinary Man's Story, Being the Pipes of Death"/><link rel="next" href="ch06.xhtml" title="VI: The Writer's Story, Being the House at Appledore"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="V: The Soldier's Story, Being a Bit of Orange Peel" epub:type="chapter" id="id780"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">V: The Soldier's Story, Being a Bit of Orange Peel</h1></div></div></div><p>"You can set your minds at rest about one thing, you fellows," began the
Soldier, with a grin. "My yarn isn't about the war. There have been
quite enough lies told already about that performance without my adding
to the number. No; my story concerns peace soldiering, and, strangely
enough, I had an ocular demonstration when dining at the Ritz two nights
ago that everything had finished up quite satisfactorily, in the
approved story–book manner. At least, when I say quite
satisfactorily—there was a price, and it was paid by one of the
principal actors. But that is the unchangeable rule: one can but shrug
one's shoulders and pay accordingly.</p><p>"The regiment—I was a squadron–leader at the time—was quartered at
Murchester. Not a bad station at all: good shooting, very fair hunting,
especially if you didn't scorn the carted stag, polo, and most excellent
cricket. Also some delightful houses in the neighbourhood; and as we'd
just come home from our foreign tour we found the place greatly to our
liking. London was an hour and a bit by train; in fact, there are many
worse stations in England than the spot I have labelled Murchester.</p><p>"The only fly in the ointment when we first arrived was a fairly natural
one, and a thing which only time could cure. The men were a bit restive.
We'd been abroad, don't forget, for more than ten years—India, Egypt,
South Africa—and the feel of the old country under their feet unsettled
'em temporarily. Nothing very bad, but an epidemic of absence without
leave and desertion broke out, and the officers had to settle down to
pull things together. Continual courts–martial for desertion don't do a
regiment any good with the powers that be, and we had to stop it.</p><p>"Of course, one of the first things to look to, when any trouble of that
sort is occurring, is the general type and standard of your N.C.O.'s. In
my squadron they were good, though just a little on the young side. I
remember one day I discussed the matter pretty thoroughly with the
squadron sergeant–major—an absolute top–notcher.</p><p>"'They're all right, sir,' he said. 'In another two or three years there
will be none better in the British Army. Especially Trevor.'</p><p>"'Ah! Sergeant–Major,' I said, looking him straight in the face, 'you
think Trevor is a good man, do you?'</p><p>"'The best we've got, sir,' he answered quietly, and he stared straight
back at me.</p><p>"'You weren't so sure when he first came,' I reminded him.</p><p>"'Well, I reckon there was a bit of jealousy, sir,' he replied, 'his
coming in from the link regiment over a good many of the chaps' heads.
But he's been with us now three months—and we know him better.'</p><p>"'I wish I could say the same,' I answered. 'He defeats me, does
Sergeant Trevor.'</p><p>"The Sergeant–Major smiled quietly. 'Does he, sir? I shouldn't have
thought he would have. That there bloke Kipling has written about the
likes of Trevor.'</p><p>"'Kipling has written a good deal about the Army,' I said, with an
answering smile. 'Mulvaney and Co. are classics.'</p><p>"'It's not Mulvaney I'm meaning, sir,' he answered. 'But didn't he write
a little bit of poetry about "Gentlemen–rankers out on the spree"?'</p><p>"'Why, yes, he did.' I lit a cigarette thoughtfully. 'I'd guessed that
much, Manfield. Is Trevor his real name?'</p><p>"'I don't know, sir,' and at that moment the subject of our discussion
walked past and saluted.</p><p>"'Sergeant Trevor,' I called after him, on the spur of the moment, and
he came up at the double. I hadn't anything really to say to him, but
ever since he'd joined us he'd puzzled me, and though, as the
sergeant–major said, the other non–commissioned officers might know him
better, I certainly didn't.</p><p>"'You're a bit of a cricketer, aren't you?' I said, as he came up.</p><p>"A faint smile flickered across his face at my question. 'I used to play
quite a lot, sir,' he answered.</p><p>"'Good; we want to get games going really strong.' I talked with them
both—squadron 'shop'—a bit longer, and all the time I was trying to
probe behind the impassive mask of Trevor's face. Incidentally, I think
he knew it; once or twice I caught a faint gleam of amusement in his
eyes—a gleam that seemed to me a little weary. And when I left them and
went across the parade ground towards the mess, his face haunted me. I
hadn't probed—not the eighth of an inch; he was still as much a mystery
as ever. But he'd got a pair of deep blue eyes, and though I wasn't a
girl to be attracted by a man's eyes, I couldn't get his out of my mind.
They baffled me; the man himself baffled me—and I've always disliked
being baffled.</p><p>"It was a few nights after, in mess, that the next piece in the puzzle
came along. We had in the regiment—he was killed in the war, poor
devil!—a fellow of the name of Blenton, a fairly senior captain. He
wasn't in my squadron, and his chief claim to notoriety was as a
cricketer. Had he been able to play regularly he would have been easily
up to first–class form—as it was he periodically turned out for the
county; but he used to go in first wicket down for the Army. So you can
gather his sort of form.</p><p>"It was over the port that the conversation cropped up, and it
interested me because it was about Trevor. As far as cricket was
concerned I hardly knew which end of a bat one held.</p><p>"'Dog–face has got a winner,' I heard Blenton say across the table. I
may say that I answered to that tactful sobriquet, for reasons into
which we need not enter. 'One Sergeant Trevor in your squadron, old
boy,' he turned to me. 'I was watching him at the nets to–night.'</p><p>"'Is he any good?' I said.</p><p>"'My dear fellow,' answered Blenton, deliberately, 'he is out and away
the best bat we've had in the regiment for years. He's up to Army form!'</p><p>"'Who's that?' demanded the commanding officer, sitting up and taking
notice at once.</p><p>"'Sergeant Trevor in B squadron, Colonel,' said Blenton. 'I was watching
him this evening at nets. Of course, the bowling was tripe, but he's in
a completely different class to the average soldier cricketer.'</p><p>"'Did you talk to him?' I asked, curiously.</p><p>"'I did. And he struck me as being singularly uncommunicative. Asked him
where he learnt his cricket, and he hummed and hawed, and finally said
he'd played a lot in his village before joining the Army. I couldn't
quite make him out, Dog–face. And why the devil didn't he play for us
out in Jo'burg?'</p><p>"'Because he only joined a couple of months before we sailed,' I
answered. 'Came with that last draft we got.'</p><p>"'Well, I wish we had a few more trained in his village,' said Blenton.
'We could do with them.'</p><p>"After mess, I tackled Philip Blenton in the ante–room.</p><p>"'What's your candid opinion of Trevor, Philip?' I demanded.</p><p>"He stopped on his way to play bridge, and bit the end off his cigar.</p><p>"'As a cricketer,' he said, 'or as a man?'</p><p>"'Both,' I answered.</p><p>"'Well, my candid opinion is that he learned his game at a first–class
public school,' he replied. 'And I am further of the opinion, from the
few words I spoke to him, that one would have expected to find him here
and not in the Sergeants' Mess. What's his story? Do you know?'</p><p>"'I don't,' I shook my head. 'Haven't an idea. But you've confirmed my
own impressions.'</p><p>"And there I had to leave it for some months. Periodically I talked to
Trevor, deliberately tried to trap him into some admission which would
give me a clue to his past, but he was as wary as a fox and as close as
an oyster. I don't know why I took the trouble—after all, it was his
business entirely, but the fellow intrigued me. He was such an
extraordinarily fine N.C.O., and there was never a sign of his hitting
the bottle, which is the end of a good many gentlemen–rankers. Moreover,
he didn't strike me as a fellow who had come a cropper, which is the
usual cause of his kind.</p><p>"And then one day, when I least expected it, the problem began to solve
itself. Philip Blenton rang me up in the morning after breakfast, from a
house in the neighbourhood, where he was staying for a couple of two–day
matches. Could I possibly spare Sergeant Trevor for the first of them?
Against the I Z., who had brought down a snorting team, and Carter—the
Oxford blue—had failed the local eleven at the last moment. If I
couldn't they'd have to rake in one of the gardeners, but they weren't
too strong as it was.</p><p>"So I sent for Trevor, and asked him if he'd care to play. I saw his
eyes gleam for a moment; then he shook his head.</p><p>"'I think not, thank you, sir,' he said, quietly.</p><p>"'It's not quite like you to let Captain Blenton down, Trevor,' I
remarked. 'He's relying on you.'</p><p>"I knew it was the right note to take with him, and I was very keen on
his playing. I was going out myself that afternoon to watch, and I
wanted to see him in different surroundings. We argued for a bit—I knew
he was as keen as mustard in one way to play—and after a while he said
he would. Then he went out of the office, and as it happened I followed
him. There was an old cracked mirror in the passage outside, and as I
opened the door he had just shut behind him, I had a glimpse of Sergeant
Trevor examining his face in the glass. He'd got his hand so placed that
it blotted out his moustache, and he seemed very intent on his
reflection. Then he saw me, and for a moment or two we stared at one
another in silence. Squadron–leader and troop–sergeant had gone; we were
just two men, and the passage was empty. And I acted on a sudden
impulse, and clapped him on the back.</p><p>"'Don't be a fool, man,' I cried. 'Is there any reason why you shouldn't
be recognised?'</p><p>"'Nothing shady, Major,' he answered, quietly. 'But if one starts on a
certain course, it's best to go through with it!'</p><p>"At that moment the pay–sergeant appeared, and Trevor pulled himself
together, saluted smartly, and was gone.</p><p>"I suppose these things are planned out beforehand," went on the
Soldier, thoughtfully. "To call it all blind chance seems a well–nigh
impossible solution to me. And yet the cynic would assuredly laugh at
connecting a child eating an orange in a back street in Oxford, and the
death while fishing in Ireland of one of the greatest–hearted men that
ever lived. But unless that child had eaten that orange, and left the
peel on the pavement for Carter, the Oxford blue, to slip on and sprain
his ankle, the events I am going to relate would, in all probability,
never have taken place. However, since delving too deeply into cause and
effect inevitably produces insanity, I'd better get on with it.</p><p>"I turned up about three o'clock at Crosby Hall, along with four or five
other fellows from the regiment. Usual sort of stunt—marquee and
lemonade, with whisky in the background for the hopeless cases. The I Z.
merchants were in the field, and Trevor was batting. There was an Eton
boy in with him, and the score was two hundred odd for five wickets.
Philip Blenton lounged up as soon as he saw me, grinning all over his
face.</p><p>"'Thank Heaven you let him come, old man! He's pulled eighty of the best
out of his bag already, and doesn't look like getting out.'</p><p>"'He wouldn't come at first, Philip,' I said, and he stared at me in
surprise. 'I think he was afraid of being recognised.'</p><p>"A burst of applause greeted a magnificent drive past cover–point, and
for a while we watched the game in silence, until another long round of
cheering announced that Sergeant Trevor had got his century. As I've
said before, I'm no cricketer, but there was no need to be an expert to
realise that he was something out of the way. He was treating the
by–no–means–indifferent I Z. bowling with the utmost contempt, and old
Lord Apson, our host, was beside himself with joy. He was a cricket
maniac; his week was an annual fixture; and for the first time for many
years he saw his team really putting it across the I Z. And it was just
as I was basking in a little reflected glory that I saw a very dear old
friend of mine arrive in the enclosure, accompanied by a perfectly
charming girl.</p><p>"'Why, Yeverley, old man!' I cried, 'how are you?'</p><p>"'Dog–face, as I live!' he shouted, seizing me by both hands.
'Man–alive, I'm glad to see you. Let me introduce you to my wife; Doris,
this is Major Chilham—otherwise Dog–face.'</p><p>"I shook hands with the girl, who was standing smiling beside him, and
for a while we stopped there talking. He was fifteen years or so older
than I, and had left the service as a Captain, but we both came from the
same part of the country, and in days gone by I'd known him very well
indeed. His marriage had taken place four years previously while I was
abroad, and now, meeting his wife for the first time, I recalled bit by
bit the gossip I'd heard in letters I got from home. How to everyone's
amazement he'd married a girl young enough to be his daughter; how
everybody had prophesied disaster, and affirmed that she was not half
good enough for one of the elect like Giles Yeverley; how she'd been
engaged to someone else and thrown him over. And yet as I looked at them
both it struck me that the Jeremiahs had as usual been completely wrong:
certainly nothing could exceed the dog–like devotion in Giles's eyes
whenever he looked at his wife.</p><p>"We strolled over to find some easy chairs, and he fussed round her as
if she was an invalid. She took it quite naturally and calmly with a
faint and charming smile, and when he finally bustled away to talk to
Apson, leaving me alone with her, she was still smiling.</p><p>"'You know Giles well?' she said.</p><p>"'Awfully well,' I answered. 'And having now returned from my sojourn in
the wilds, I hope I shall get to know his wife equally well.'</p><p>"'That's very nice of you, Dog–face'—she turned and looked at me—and,
by Jove, she was pretty. 'If you're anything like Giles—you must be a
perfect dear.'</p><p>"Now I like that sort of a remark when it's made in the right way. It
establishes a very pleasant footing at once, with no danger of
miconstruction—like getting on good terms with a new horse the moment
you put your feet in the irons, instead of messing around for half the
hunt. Anyway, for the next ten minutes or so I didn't pay very much
attention to the cricket. I gathered that there was one small son—Giles
junior—who was the apple of his father's eye; and that at the moment a
heavy love affair was in progress between the young gentleman aged three
and the General's daughter, who was as much as four, and showed no shame
over the matter whatever. Also that Giles and she were stopping with the
General and his wife for a week or ten days.</p><p>"And it was at that stage of the proceedings that a prolonged burst of
applause made us look at the cricket. Sergeant Trevor was apparently
out—how I hadn't an idea—and was half–way between the wickets and the
tent next to the one in which we were sitting, and which Apson always
had erected for the local villagers and their friends. I saw them put up
one hundred and twenty–five on the board as Trevor's score, and did my
share in the clapping line.</p><p>"'A fine player—that fellow,' I said, following him with my eyes.
'Don't know much about the game myself, but the experts tell me―' And
at that moment I saw her face, and stopped abruptly. She had gone very
white, and her knuckles were gleaming like the ivory on the handle of
her parasol.</p><p>"'Major Chilham,' she said—and her voice was the tensest thing I've
ever heard—'who is that man who has just come out?'</p><p>"'Trevor is his name,' I answered, quietly. 'He's one of the
troop–sergeants in my squadron.' I was looking at her curiously, as the
colour slowly came back to her face. 'Why? Did you think you knew him?'</p><p>"'He reminded me of someone I knew years ago,' she said, sitting back in
her chair. 'But of course I must have been mistaken.'</p><p>"And then rather abruptly she changed the conversation, though every now
and then she glanced towards the next tent, as if trying to see Trevor.
And sitting beside her I realised that there was something pretty
serious in the wind. She was on edge, though she was trying not to show
it—and Trevor was the cause, or the man who called himself Trevor. All
my curiosity came back, though I made no allusion to him; I was content
to await further developments.</p><p>"They weren't long in coming. The house team, with the respectable total
of three hundred and fifty odd, were all out by tea–time, and both
elevens forgathered in the tent behind. All, that is, except Trevor, who
remained in the other until Apson himself went and pulled him out. I
watched the old man, with his cheery smile, take Trevor by the elbow and
literally drag him out of his chair; I watched Trevor in his blue
undress jacket, smart as be damned, coming towards us with our host. And
then very deliberately I looked at Giles Yeverley's wife. She was
staring over my head at the two men; then she lowered her parasol.</p><p>"'So you weren't mistaken after all, Mrs. Giles,' I said, quietly.</p><p>"'No, Dog–face, I wasn't,' she answered. 'Would you get hold of Giles
for me, and tell him I'd like to get back. Say I'm not feeling very
well.'</p><p>"I got up at once and went in search of her husband. I found him talking
to the Zingari captain and Sergeant Trevor. He seemed quite excited,
appealing as he spoke to the I Z. skipper, while Trevor stood by
listening with a faint smile.</p><p>"'What he says is quite right, Sergeant Trevor,' remarked the Zingari
man as I came up. 'If you cared to consider it—you are absolutely up to
the best county form. Of course, I don't know about your residential
qualifications, but that can generally be fixed.'</p><p>"'Dog–face,' cried Yeverley, as soon as he saw me, 'he's in your
squadron, isn't he? Well, it's so long since I left the Army that I've
forgotten all about discipline—but I tell you here—right now in front
of him—that Sergeant Trevor ought to chuck soldiering and take up
professional cricket. Bimbo here agrees with me.'</p><p>"'Giles, you'll burst your waistcoat if you get so excited,' I remarked,
casually. 'And, incidentally, Mrs. Yeverley wants to go home.'</p><p>"As I said the name I looked at Trevor, and my last doubt vanished. He
gave a sudden start, which Giles, who had immediately torn off to his
wife, didn't see, and proceeded to back into the farthest corner of the
tea–tent. But once again old Apson frustrated him. Not for him the
endless pauses and waits of first–class cricket; five minutes to roll
the pitch and he was leading his team into the field. Trevor had to go
from his sanctuary, and there was only one exit from the enclosure in
front of the tent.</p><p>"They met—Mrs. Giles and Trevor—actually at that exit. By the irony of
things, I think it was Giles who caused the meeting. He hurried forward
as he saw Trevor going out, and caught him by the arm; dear old
chap!—he was cricket mad if ever a man was. And so blissfully
unconscious of the other, bigger thing going on right under his nose.</p><p>"'Don't you forget what I said, Trevor,' he said, earnestly. 'Any county
would be glad to have you. I'm going to talk to Major Chilham about it
seriously.'</p><p>"And I doubt if Trevor heard a word. Over Giles's shoulder he was
staring at Giles's wife—and she was staring back at him, while her
breast rose and fell in little gasps, and it seemed to me that her lips
were trembling. Then it was over; Trevor went out to field—Giles
bustled back to his wife. And I, being a hopeless case, went in search
of alcohol."</p><p>The Soldier paused to light another cigar.</p><p>"He carried out his threat, did Giles with regard to me. Two or three
days later I lunched with the General, and it seemed to me that we never
got off the subject of Trevor. It wasn't only his opinion; had not Bimbo
Lawrence, the I Z. captain, and one of the shrewdest judges of cricket
in England, agreed with him? And so on without cessation about Trevor,
the cricketer, while on the opposite side of the table, next to me, sat
his wife, who could not get beyond Trevor, the man. Once or twice she
glanced at me appealingly, as if to say: 'For God's sake, stop
him!'—but it was a task beyond my powers. I made one or two abortive
attempts, and then I gave it up. The situation was beyond me; one could
only let him ramble on and pray for the end of lunch.</p><p>"And then he left the cricket and came to personalities.</p><p>"'Know anything about him, Dog–face?' he asked. 'Up at old Apson's place
he struck me as being a gentleman. Anyway, he's a darned nice fellow.
Wonder why he enlisted?'</p><p>"'Oh, Giles, for goodness' sake, let's try another topic?' said his
wife, suddenly. 'We've had Sergeant Trevor since lunch began.'</p><p>"Poor old Giles looked at her in startled surprise, and she gave him a
quick smile which robbed her words of their irritability. But I could
see she was on the rack, and though I didn't know the real facts, it
wasn't hard to make a shrewd guess as to the cause.</p><p>"It was just before we rose from the table, I remember, that she said to
me under the cover of the general conversation: 'My God! Dog–face—it's
not fair.'</p><p>"'Will you tell me?' I answered. 'I might help.'</p><p>"'Perhaps I will some day,' she said, quietly. 'But you can't help; no
one can do that. It was my fault all through, and the only thing that
matters now is that Giles should never know.'</p><p>"I don't quite know why she suddenly confided in me, even to that
extent. I suppose with her woman's intuition she realised that I'd
guessed something, and it helps to get a thing off one's chest at times.
Evidently it had been an unexpected meeting, and I cursed myself for
having made him play. And yet how could one have foretold? It was just a
continuation of the jig–saw started by that damned bit of orange peel.
As she said, all that mattered was that Giles—dear old chap!—should
never know."</p><p>The Soldier smiled a little sadly. "So do the humans propose; but the
God that moves the pieces frequently has different ideas. He did—that
very afternoon. It was just as I was going that two white–faced nurses
clutching two scared children appeared on the scene and babbled
incoherently. And then the General's groom hove in sight—badly cut
across the face and shaky at the knees—and from him we got the story.</p><p>"They'd started off in the General's dogcart to go to some children's
party, and something had frightened the horse, which had promptly
bolted. I knew the brute—a great raking black, though the groom, who
was a first–class whip, generally had no difficulty in managing him. But
on this occasion apparently he'd got clean away along the road into the
town. He might have got the horse under control after a time, when, to
his horror, he saw that the gates were closed at the railway crossing in
front. And it was at that moment that a man—one of the sergeants from
the barracks—had dashed out suddenly from the pavement and got to the
horse's head. He was trampled on badly, but he hung on—and the horse
had ceased to bolt when they crashed into the gates. The shafts were
smashed, but nothing more. And the horse wasn't hurt. And they'd carried
away the sergeant on an improvised stretcher. No; he hadn't spoken. He
was unconscious.</p><p>"'Which sergeant was it?' I asked, quietly—though I knew the answer
before the groom gave it.</p><p>"'Sergeant Trevor, sir,' he said. 'B squadron.'</p><p>"'Is he—is he badly hurt?' said the girl, and her face was ashen.</p><p>"'I dunno, mum,' answered the groom. 'They took 'im off to the
'orspital, and I was busy with the 'orse.'</p><p>"'I'll ring up, if I may, General,' I said, and he nodded.</p><p>"I spoke to Purvis, the R.A.M.C. fellow, and his voice was very grave.
They'd brought Trevor in still unconscious, and, though he wouldn't
swear to it at the moment, he was afraid his back was broken. But he
couldn't tell absolutely for certain until he came to. I hung up the
receiver and found Mrs. Giles standing behind me. She said nothing—but
just waited for me to speak.</p><p>"'Purvis doesn't know for certain,' I said, taking both her hands in
mine. 'But there's a possibility, my dear, that his back is broken.'</p><p>"She was a thoroughbred, that girl. She didn't make a fuss or cry out;
she just looked me straight in the face and nodded her head once or
twice.</p><p>"'I must go to him, of course,' she said, gravely. 'Will you arrange it
for me, please?'</p><p>"'He's unconscious still,' I told her.</p><p>"'Then I must be beside him when he comes to,' she answered. 'Even if
there was nothing else—he's saved my baby's life.'</p><p>"'I'll take you in my car,' I said, when I saw that she was absolutely
determined. 'Leave it all to me.'</p><p>"'I must see him alone, Dog–face.' She paused by the door, with her
handkerchief rolled into a tight little ball in her hand. 'I want to
know that he's forgiven me.'</p><p>"'You shall see him alone if it's humanly possible,' I answered gravely,
and at that she was gone.</p><p>"I don't quite know how I did it, but somehow or other I got her away
from the General's house without Giles knowing. Giles junior was quite
unhurt, and disposed to regard the entire thing as an entertainment got
up especially for his benefit. And when she'd made sure of that, and
kissed him passionately to his intense disgust, she slipped away with me
in the car.</p><p>"'You mustn't be disappointed,' I warned her as we drove along, 'if you
can't see him alone. He may have been put into a ward with other men.'</p><p>"'Then they must put some screens round him,' she whispered. 'I must
kiss him before—before―.' She didn't complete the sentence; but it
wasn't necessary.</p><p>"We didn't speak again until I turned in at the gates of the hospital.
And then I asked her a question which had been on the tip of my tongue a
dozen times.</p><p>"'Who is he—really?'</p><p>"'Jimmy Dallas is his name,' she answered, quietly. 'We were engaged.
And then his father lost all his money. He thought that was why—why I
was beastly to him—but oh! Dog–face, it wasn't at all. I thought he was
fond of another girl—and it was all a mistake. I found it out too late.
And then Jimmy had disappeared—and I'd married Giles. Up at that
cricket match was the first time I'd seen him since my wedding.'</p><p>"We drew up at the door, and I got out. It's the little tragedies, the
little misunderstandings, that are so pitiful, and in all conscience
this was a case in point. A boy and a girl—each too proud to explain,
or ask for an explanation; and now the big tragedy. God! it seemed so
futile.</p><p>"I left her sitting in the car, and went in search of Purvis. I found
him with Trevor—I still thought of him under that name—and he was
conscious again. The doctor looked up as I tiptoed in, and shook his
head at me warningly. So I waited, and after a while Purvis left the bed
and drew me out into the passage.</p><p>"'I'm not sure,' he said. 'He's so infernally bruised and messed about.
His left arm is broken in two places, and three ribs—and I'm afraid his
back as well. He seems so numb. But I can't be certain.'</p><p>"'Mrs. Yeverley is here,' I said. 'The mother of one of the kids he
saved. She wants to see him.'</p><p>"'Out of the question,' snapped Purvis. 'I absolutely forbid it.'</p><p>"'But you mustn't forbid it, Doctor.' We both swung round, to see the
girl herself standing behind us. 'I've got to see him. There are other
reasons besides his having saved my baby's life.'</p><p>"'They must wait, Mrs. Yeverley,' answered the Doctor. 'In a case of
this sort the only person I would allow to see him would be his wife.'</p><p>"'If I hadn't been a fool,' she said deliberately, 'I should have been
his wife,' and Purvis's jaw dropped.</p><p>"Without another word she swept past him into the ward, and Purvis stood
there gasping.</p><p>"'Well, I'm damned!' he muttered, and I couldn't help smiling. It was
rather a startling statement to come from a woman stopping with the
G.O.C. about a sergeant in a cavalry regiment.</p><p>"And then, quite suddenly and unexpectedly, came the final turn in the
wheel. I was strolling up and down outside with Purvis, who was a sahib
as well as a Doctor and had asked no questions.</p><p>"'If his back is broken it can't hurt him,' he had remarked, 'and if it
isn't it will do him good.'</p><p>"At that we had left it, when suddenly, to my horror, I saw Giles
himself going into the hospital.</p><p>"'Good Lord, Doc!' I cried, sprinting after him, 'that's her husband.
And he doesn't know she's here.'</p><p>"But a lot can happen in a few seconds, and I was just a few seconds too
late. As I got to the door I saw Giles in front of me—standing at the
entrance to the ward as if he had been turned to stone. A big screen hid
the bed from sight—but a screen is not sound proof. He looked at me as
I came up, and involuntarily I stopped as I saw his face. And then quite
clearly from the room beyond came his wife's voice.</p><p>"'My darling, darling boy!—it's you and only you for ever and ever!'</p><p>"I don't quite know how much Giles had guessed before. I think he knew
about her previous engagement, but I'm quite sure he had never
associated Trevor with it. A year or two later she told me that when she
married him she had made no attempt to conceal the fact that she had
loved another man—and loved him still. And Giles had taken her on those
terms. But at the time I didn't know that: I only knew that a very dear
friend's world had crashed about his head with stunning suddenness. It
was Giles who pulled himself together first—Giles, with a face grey and
lined, who said in a loud voice to me: 'Well, Dog–face, where is the
invalid?'</p><p>"And then he waited a moment or two before he went round the screen.</p><p>"'Ah! my dear,' he said, quite steadily, as he saw his wife, 'you here?'</p><p>"He played his part for ten minutes, stiff–lipped and without a falter;
then he went, and his wife went with him to continue the play in which
they were billed for life. Trevor's back was not broken—in a couple of
months he was back at duty. And so it might have continued for the
duration, but for Giles being drowned fishing in Ireland."</p><p>The Soldier stared thoughtfully at the fire.</p><p>"He was a first–class fisherman and a wonderful swimmer, was Giles
Yeverley, and sometimes—I wonder. They say he got caught in a
bore—that perhaps he got cramp. But, as I say, sometimes—I wonder.</p><p>"I saw them—Jimmy Dallas, sometime Sergeant Trevor, and his wife—at
the Ritz two nights ago. They seemed wonderfully in love, though they'd
been married ten years, and I stopped by their table.</p><p>"'Sit down, Dog–face,' she ordered, 'and have a liqueur.'</p><p>"So I sat down and had a liqueur. And it was just as I was going that
she looked at me with her wonderful smile, and said, very softly: 'Thank
God! dear old Giles never knew; and now, if he does, he'll understand.'"</p><p>The Soldier got up and stretched himself.</p><p>"A big result for a bit of yellow peel."</p></section><footer/></body></html>