<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>VIII: When Greek Meets Greek I</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch07.xhtml" title="VII: The Old Dining-room I"/><link rel="next" href="ch09.xhtml" title="IX: Jimmy Lethbridge's Temptation I"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="VIII: When Greek Meets Greek I" epub:type="chapter" id="id840"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">VIII: When Greek Meets Greek I</h1></div></div></div><p>"But, Bill, I don't understand. How much did you borrow from this man?"</p><p>Sybil Daventry looked at her brother, sitting huddled up in his chair,
with a little frown.</p><p>"I borrowed a thousand," he answered, sulkily. "And like a fool I didn't
read the thing he made me sign—at least, not carefully. Hang it, I've
only had the money six months, and now he's saying that I owe him over
two. I saw something about twenty–five per cent., and now I find it was
twenty–five per cent. a month. And the swine is pressing for payment
unless―" He broke off and stared into the fire shamefacedly.</p><p>"Unless what?" demanded his sister.</p><p>"Well, you see, it's this way." The boy stammered a little, and refused
to look at her. "I was jolly well up the spout when this blighter told
me what I owed him, and I suppose I must have showed it pretty clearly.
Anyway, I was propping up the bar at the Cri., getting a cocktail, when
a fellow standing next me started gassing. Not a bad sort of cove at
all; knows you very well by sight."</p><p>"Knows me?" said the girl, bewildered. "Who was he?"</p><p>"I'm coming to that later," went on her brother. "Well, we had a couple
more and then he suggested tearing a chop together. And I don't know—he
seemed so decent and all that—that I told him I was in the soup. Told
him the whole yarn and asked his advice sort of business. Well, as I
say, he was bally sporting about it all, and finally asked me who the
bird was who had tied up the boodle. I told him, and here's the lucky
part of the whole show—this fellow Perrison knew him. Perrison was the
man I was lunching with."</p><p>He paused and lit a cigarette, while the girl stared at him gravely.</p><p>"Well," she said at length, "go on."</p><p>"It was after lunch that he got busy. He said to me: 'Look here,
Daventry, you've made a bally fool of yourself, but you're not the
first. I'll write a note to Messrs. Smith and Co.'—those are the
warriors who gave me the money—'and try and persuade them to give you
more time, or even possibly reduce the rate of interest.' Of course, I
was all on this, and I arranged to lunch with him again next day, after
Smith and Co. had had time to function. And sure enough they did. Wrote
a letter in which they were all over me; any friend of Mr. Perrison's
was entitled to special treatment, and so on and so forth. Naturally I
was as bucked as a dog with two tails, and asked Perrison if I couldn't
do something more material than just thank him. And—er—he—I mean it
was then he told me he knew you by sight."</p><p>He glanced at his sister, and then quickly looked away again.</p><p>"He suggested—er—that perhaps I could arrange to introduce him to you;
that it would be an honour he would greatly appreciate, and all that
sort of rot."</p><p>The girl was sitting very still. "Yes," she said, quietly, "and
you—agreed."</p><p>"Well, of course I did. Hang it, he's quite a decent fellow. Bit Cityish
to look at, and I shouldn't think he knows which end of a horse goes
first. But he's got me out of the devil of a hole, Sybil, and the least
you can do is to be moderately decent to the bird. I mean it's not
asking much, is it? I left the governor looking at him in the hall as if
he was just going to tread on his face, and that long slab—your pal—is
gazing at him through his eyeglasses as if he was mad."</p><p>"He's not my pal, Bill." Sybil Daventry's colour heightened a little.</p><p>"Well, you asked him here, anyway," grunted the boy. Then with a sudden
change of tone he turned to her appealingly. "Syb, old girl—for the
Lord's sake play the game. You know what the governor is, and if he
hears about this show—especially as it's—as it's not the first
time—there'll be the deuce to pay. You know he said last time that if
it happened again he'd turn me out of the house. And the old man is as
stubborn as a mule. I only want you to be a bit decent to Perrison."</p><p>She looked at him with a grave smile. "If Mr. Perrison is satisfied with
my being decent to him, as you put it, I'm perfectly prepared to play
the game. But―" She frowned and rose abruptly. "Come on, and I'll
have a look at him."</p><p>In silence they went downstairs. Tea had just been brought in, and the
house–party was slowly drifting into the hall. But Sybil barely noticed
them; her eyes were fixed on the man talking to her father. Or rather,
at the moment, her father was talking to the man, and his remark was
painfully audible.</p><p>"There is a very good train back to London at seven–thirty,
Mr.—ah—Mr.―"</p><p>Her brother stepped forward. "But I say, Dad," he said, nervously, "I
asked Perrison to stop the night. I've just asked Sybil, and she says
she can fix him up somewhere."</p><p>"How do you do, Mr. Perrison?" With a charming smile she held out her
hand. "Of course you must stop the night."</p><p>Then she moved away to the tea–table, feeling agreeably relieved; it was
better than she had expected. The man was well–dressed; perhaps, to her
critical eye, a little too well–dressed—but still quite presentable.</p><p>"You averted a catastrophe, Miss Daventry." A lazy voice beside her
interrupted her thoughts, and with a smile she turned to the speaker.</p><p>"Dad is most pestilentially rude at times, isn't he? And Bill told me he
left <span class="emphasis"><em>you</em></span> staring at the poor man as if he was an insect."</p><p>Archie Longworth laughed.</p><p>"He'd just contradicted your father flatly as you came downstairs. And
on a matter concerning horses. However—the breeze has passed. But, tell
me," he stared at her gravely, "why the sudden invasion?"</p><p>Her eyebrows went up a little. "May I ask why not?" she said, coldly.
"Surely my brother can invite a friend to the house if he wishes."</p><p>"I stand corrected," answered Longworth, quietly. "Has he known him
long?"</p><p>"I haven't an idea," said the girl. "And after all, Mr. Longworth, I
hadn't known you very long when I asked you."</p><p>And then, because she realised that there was a possibility of
construing rather more into her words than she had intended, she turned
abruptly to speak to another guest. So she failed to see the sudden
inscrutable look that came into Archie Longworth's keen blue eyes—the
quick clenching of his powerful fists. But when a few minutes later she
again turned to him, he was just his usual lazy self.</p><p>"Do you think your logic is very good?" he demanded. "You might have
made a mistake as well."</p><p>"You mean that you think my brother has?" she said, quickly.</p><p>"It is visible on the surface to the expert eye," he returned, gravely.
"But, in addition, I happen to have inside information."</p><p>"Do you know Mr. Perrison, then?"</p><p>He nodded. "Yes, I have—er—met him before."</p><p>"But he doesn't know you," cried the girl.</p><p>"No—at least—er—we'll leave it at that. And I would be obliged, Miss
Daventry, in case you happen to be speaking to him, if you would refrain
from mentioning the fact that I know him." He stared at her gravely.</p><p>"You're very mysterious, Mr. Longworth," said the girl, with an attempt
at lightness.</p><p>"And if I may I will prolong my visit until our friend departs,"
continued Longworth.</p><p>"Why, of course," she said, bending over the tea–tray. "You weren't
thinking of going—going yet, were you?"</p><p>"I was thinking after lunch that I should have to go to–morrow," he
said, putting down his tea–cup.</p><p>"But why so soon?" she asked, and her voice was low. "Aren't you
enjoying yourself?"</p><p>"In the course of a life that has taken me into every corner of the
globe," he answered, slowly, "I have never dreamed that I could be so
utterly and perfectly happy as I have been here. It has opened my mind
to a vista of the Things that Might Be—if the Things that Had Been were
different. But as you grow older, Sybil, you will learn one bitter
truth: no human being can ever be exactly what he seems. Masks? just
masks! And underneath—God and that being alone know."</p><p>He rose abruptly, and she watched him bending over Lady Granton with his
habitual lazy grace. The indolent smile was round his lips—the
irrepressible twinkle was in his eyes. But for the first time he had
called her Sybil; for the first time—she <span class="emphasis"><em>knew</em></span>. The vague forebodings
conjured up by his words were swamped by that one outstanding fact; she
<span class="emphasis"><em>knew</em></span>. And nothing else mattered.</p><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>II</p></blockquote></div><p>It was not until Perrison joined her in the conservatory after dinner
that she found herself called on to play the part set her by her
brother.</p><p>She had gone there—though nothing would have induced her to admit the
fact—in the hope that someone else would follow: the man with the lazy
blue eyes and the eyeglass. And then instead of him had come Perrison,
with a shade too much deference in his manner, and a shade too little
control of the smirk on his face. With a sudden sick feeling she
realised at that moment exactly where she stood. Under a debt of
obligation to this man—under the necessity of a <span class="emphasis"><em>tête–à–tête</em></span> with him,
one, moreover, when, if she was to help Bill, she must endeavour to be
extra nice.</p><p>For a while the conversation was commonplace, while she feverishly
longed for someone to come in and relieve the tension. But Bridge was in
progress, and there was Snooker in the billiard–room, and at length she
resigned herself to the inevitable. Presumably she would have to thank
him for his kindness to Bill; after all he undoubtedly had been very
good to her brother.</p><p>"Bill has told me, Mr. Perrison, how kind you've been in the way you've
helped him in this—this unfortunate affair." She plunged valiantly, and
gave a sigh of relief as she cleared the first fence.</p><p>Perrison waved a deprecating hand. "Don't mention it, Miss Daventry,
don't mention it. But—er—of course, something will have to be done,
and—well, there's no good mincing matters—done very soon."</p><p>The girl's face grew a little white, but her voice was quite steady.</p><p>"But he told me that you had arranged things with these people. Please
smoke, if you want to."</p><p>Perrison bowed his thanks and carefully selected a cigarette. The moment
for which he had been playing had now arrived, in circumstances even
more favourable than he had dared to hope.</p><p>"Up to a point that is quite true," he remarked, quietly. "Messrs. Smith
and Co. have many ramifications of business—money–lending being only
one of the irons they have in the fire. And because I have had many
dealings with the firm professionally—over the sale of precious stones,
I may say, which is my own particular line of work—they were disposed
to take a lenient view about the question of the loan. Not press for
payment, and perhaps—though I can't promise this—even be content with
a little less interest. But—er—Miss Daventry, it's the other thing
where the trouble is going to occur."</p><p>The girl stared at him with dilated eyes. "What other thing, Mr.
Perrison?"</p><p>"Hasn't your brother told you?" said Perrison, surprised. "Oh, well,
perhaps I—er—shouldn't have mentioned it."</p><p>"Go on, please." Her voice was low. "What is this other thing?"</p><p>For a moment he hesitated—a well–simulated hesitation. Then he shrugged
his shoulders slightly.</p><p>"Well—if you insist. As a matter of fact, your brother didn't tell me
about it, and I only found it out in the course of my conversation with
one of the Smith partners. Apparently some weeks ago he bought some
distinctly valuable jewellery—a pearl–necklace, to be exact—from a
certain firm. At least, when I say he bought it—he did not pay for it.
He gave your father's name as a reference, and the firm considered it
satisfactory. It was worth about eight hundred pounds, this necklace,
and your very stupid brother, instead of giving it to the lady whom,
presumably, he had got it for, became worse than stupid. He became
criminal."</p><p>"What do you mean?" The girl was looking at him terrified.</p><p>"He pawned this necklace which he hadn't paid for, Miss Daventry, which
is, I regret to say, a criminal offence. And the trouble of the
situation is that the firm he bought the pearls from has just found it
out. He pawned it at a place which is one of the ramifications of Smith
and Co., who gave him, I believe, a very good price for it—over five
hundred pounds. The firm, in the course of business, two or three days
ago—and this is the incredibly unfortunate part of it—happened to show
this self–same necklace, while they were selling other things, to the
man it had originally come from. Of course, being pawned, it wasn't for
sale—but the man recognised it at once. And then the fat was in the
fire."</p><p>"Do you mean to say," whispered the girl, "that—that they might send
him to prison?"</p><p>"Unless something is done very quickly, Miss Daventry, the matter will
certainly come into the law courts. Messrs. Gross and Sons"—a faint
noise from the darkness at the end of the conservatory made him swing
round suddenly, but everything was silent again—"Messrs. Gross and Sons
are very difficult people in many ways. They are the people it came from
originally, I may tell you. And firms, somewhat naturally, differ, like
human beings. Some are disposed to be lenient—others are not. I'm sorry
to say Gross and Sons are one of those who are not."</p><p>"But couldn't you see them, or something, and explain?"</p><p>"My dear Miss Daventry," said Perrison, gently, "I must ask you to be
reasonable. What can I explain? Your brother wanted money, and he
adopted a criminal method of getting it. That I am afraid—ugly as it
sounds—is all there is to it."</p><p>"Then, Mr. Perrison—can nothing be done?" She bent forward eagerly, her
hands clasped, her lips slightly parted; and once again came that faint
noise from the end of the conservatory.</p><p>But Mr. Perrison was too engrossed to heed it this time; the nearness,
the appeal of this girl, who from the time he had first seen her six
months previously at a theatre had dominated his life, was making his
senses swim. And with it the veneer began to drop; the hairy heel began
to show, though he made a tremendous endeavour to keep himself in check.</p><p>"There is one thing," he said, hoarsely. "And I hope you will understand
that I should not have been so precipitate—except for the urgency of
your brother's case. If I go to Messrs. Gross and say to them that a
prosecution by them would affect me personally, I think I could persuade
them to take no further steps."</p><p>Wonder was beginning to dawn in the girl's eyes. "Affect you
personally?" she repeated.</p><p>"If, for instance, I could tell them that for family reasons—urgent,
strong family reasons—they would be doing me a great service by letting
matters drop, I think they would do it."</p><p>She rose suddenly—wonder replaced by horror. She had just realised his
full meaning.</p><p>"What on earth are you talking about, Mr. Perrison?" she said,
haughtily.</p><p>And then the heel appeared in all its hairiness. "If I may tell them,"
he leered, "that I am going to marry into the family I'll guarantee they
will do nothing more."</p><p>"Marry you?" The biting scorn in her tone changed the leer to a snarl.</p><p>"Yes—marry me, or see your brother jugged. Money won't save him—so
there's no good going to your father. Money will square up the Smith
show—it won't square the other." And then his tone changed. "Why not,
little girl? I'm mad about you; have been ever since I saw you at a
theatre six months ago. I'm pretty well off even for these days,
and―" He came towards her, his arms outstretched, while she backed
away from him, white as a sheet. Her hands were clenched, and it was
just as she had retreated as far as she could, and the man was almost on
her, that she saw red. One hand went up; hit him—hit the brute—was her
only coherent thought. And the man, realising it, paused—an ugly look
in his eyes.</p><p>Then occurred the interruption. A strangled snort, as of a sleeper
awakening, came from behind some palms, followed by the creaking of a
chair. With a stifled curse Perrison fell back and the girl's hand
dropped to her side as the branches parted and Archie Longworth, rubbing
his eyes, stepped into the light.</p><p>"Lord save us, Miss Daventry, I've been asleep," he said, stifling a
yawn. "I knew I oughtn't to have had a third glass of port. Deuced bad
for the liver, but very pleasant for all that, isn't it, Mr.—Mr.
Perrison?"</p><p>He smiled engagingly at the scowling Perrison, and adjusted his
eyeglass.</p><p>"You sleep very silently, Mr. Longworth," snarled that worthy.</p><p>"Yes—used to win prizes for it at an infant school. Most valuable asset
in class. If one snores it disconcerts the lecturer."</p><p>Perrison swung round on his heel. "I would like an answer to my
suggestion by to–morrow, Miss Daventry," he said, softly. "Perhaps I
might have the pleasure of a walk where people don't sleep off the
effects of dinner."</p><p>With a slight bow he left the conservatory, and the girl sat down
weakly.</p><p>"Pleasant type of bird, isn't he?" drawled Longworth, watching
Perrison's retreating back.</p><p>"He's a brute—an utter brute," whispered the girl, shakily.</p><p>"I thought the interview would leave you with that impression," agreed
the man.</p><p>She sat up quickly. "Did you hear what was said?"</p><p>"Every word. That's why I was there." He smiled at her calmly.</p><p>"Then why didn't you come out sooner?" she cried, indignantly.</p><p>"I wanted to hear what he had to say, and at the same time I didn't want
you to biff him on the jaw—which from your attitude I gathered you were
on the point of doing."</p><p>"Why not? I'd have given anything to have smacked his face."</p><p>"I know. I'd have given anything to have seen you do it. But—not yet.
In fact, to–morrow you've got to go for a walk with him."</p><p>"I flatly refuse!" cried Sybil Daventry.</p><p>"More than that," continued Longworth, calmly, "you've got to keep him
on the hook. Play with him; let him think he's got a chance."</p><p>"But why?" she demanded. "I loathe him."</p><p>"Because it is absolutely essential that he should remain here until the
day after to–morrow at the earliest."</p><p>"I don't understand." She looked at him with a puzzled frown.</p><p>"You will in good time." It seemed to her his voice was just a little
weary. "Just now it is better that you shouldn't. Do you trust me enough
to do that, Sybil?"</p><p>"I trust you absolutely," and she saw him wince.</p><p>"Then keep him here till I come back."</p><p>"Are you going away, Archie?" Impulsively she laid her hand on his arm.</p><p>"To–morrow, first thing. I shall come back as soon as possible."</p><p>For a moment or two they stood in silence, then, with a gesture
strangely foreign to one so typically British, he raised her hand to his
lips. And the next instant she was alone.</p><p>A little later she saw him talking earnestly to her brother in a corner;
then someone suggested billiard–fives. An admirable game, but not one in
which it is wise to place one's hand on the edge of the table with the
fingers over the cushion. Especially if the owner of the hand is not
paying attention to the game. It was Perrison's hand, and the agony of
being hit on the fingers by a full–sized billiard ball travelling fast
must be experienced to be believed. Of course it was an accident:
Longworth was most apologetic. But in the middle of the hideous scene
that followed she caught his lazy blue eye and beat a hasty retreat to
the hall. Unrestrained mirth in such circumstances is not regarded as
the essence of tact.</p><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>III</p></blockquote></div><p>It was about ten o'clock on the morning of the next day but one that a
sharp–looking, flashily–dressed individual presented himself at the door
of Messrs. Gross and Sons. He was of the type that may be seen by the
score any day of the week propping up the West–end bars and discoursing
on racing form in a hoarse whisper.</p><p>"Mornin'," he remarked. "Mr. Johnson here yet?"</p><p>"What do you want to see him about?" demanded the assistant.</p><p>"To tell him that your hair wants cutting," snapped the other. "Hop
along, young fellah; as an ornament you're a misfit. Tell Mr. Johnson
that I've a message from Mr. Perrison."</p><p>The youth faded away, to return in a minute or two with a request that
the visitor would follow him.</p><p>"Message from Perrison? What's up?" Mr. Johnson rose from his chair as
the door closed behind the assistant.</p><p>The flashy individual laughed and pulled out his cigarette–case.</p><p>"He's pulled it off," he chuckled. "At the present moment our one and
only Joe is clasping the beauteous girl to his bosom."</p><p>"Strike me pink—he hasn't, has he?" Mr. Johnson slapped his leg
resoundingly and shook with merriment.</p><p>"That's why I've come round," continued the other. "From Smith, I am.
Joe wants to give her a little present on account." He grinned again,
and felt in his pocket. "Here it is—and he wants a receipt signed by
you—acknowledging the return of the necklace which was sent out—on
approval." He winked heavily. "He's infernally deep, is Joe." He watched
the other man as he picked up the pearls, and for a moment his blue eyes
seemed a little strained. "He wants to give that receipt to the girl—so
as to clinch the bargain."</p><p>"Why the dickens didn't he 'phone me direct?" demanded Johnson, and once
again the other grinned broadly.</p><p>"Strewth!" he said, "I laughed fit to burst this morning. The 'phone at
his girl's place is in the hall, as far as I could make out, and Joe was
whispering down it like an old woman with lumbago. 'Take 'em round to
Johnson,' he said. 'Approval—approval—you fool.' And then he turned
away and I heard him say—'Good morning, Lady Jemima.' Then back he
turns and starts whispering again. 'Do you get me, Bob?' 'Yes,' I says,
'I get you. You want me to take round the pearls to Johnson and get a
receipt from him. And what about the other thing—you know, the money
the young boob borrowed?' 'Put it in an envelope and send it to me here,
with the receipt,' he says. 'I'm going out walking this morning.' Then
he rings off, and that's that. Lord! think of Joe walking."</p><p>The grin developed into a cackling laugh, in which Mr. Johnson joined.</p><p>"He's deep—you're right," he said, admiringly. "Uncommonly deep. I
never thought he'd pull it off. Though personally, mark you, I think
he's a fool. They'll fight like cat and dog." He rang a bell on his desk
then opening a drawer he dropped the necklace inside.</p><p>"Bring me a formal receipt form," he said to the assistant. "Have you
got the other paper?" he asked, as he affixed the firm's signature to
the receipt, and the flashy individual produced it from his pocket.</p><p>"Here it is," he announced. "Put 'em both in an envelope together and
address it to Joe. I'm going along; I'll post it."</p><p>"Will you have a small tiddley before you go?" Mr. Johnson opened a
formidable–looking safe, disclosing all the necessary–looking
ingredients for the manufacture of small tiddleys.</p><p>"I don't mind if I do," conceded the other. "Here's the best—and to the
future Mrs. Joe."</p><p>A moment or two later he passed through the outer office and was
swallowed up in the crowd. And it was not till after lunch that day that
Mr. Johnson got the shock of his life—when he opened one of the early
evening papers.</p><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>"DARING ROBBERY IN WELL–KNOWN CITY FIRM.</p></blockquote></div><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>"<span class="emphasis"><em>A most daring outrage was carried out last night at the office
of Messrs. Smith and Co., the well–known financial and insurance
brokers. At a late hour this morning, some time after work was
commenced, the night watchman was discovered bound and securely
gagged in a room at the top of the premises. Further
investigation revealed that the safe had been opened—evidently
by a master hand—and the contents rifled. The extent of the
loss is at present unknown, but the police are believed to
possess several clues.</em></span>"</p></blockquote></div><p>And at the same time that Mr. Johnson was staring with a glassy stare at
this astounding piece of news, a tall, spare man with lazy blue eyes,
stretched out comfortably in the corner of a first–class carriage, was
also perusing it.</p><p>"Several clues," he murmured. "I wonder! But it was a very creditable
job, though I say it myself."</p><p>Which seemed a strange soliloquy for a well–dressed man in a first–class
carriage. And what might have seemed almost stranger, had there been any
way of knowing such a recondite fact, was that in one of the mail bags
reposing in the back of the train, a mysterious transformation had taken
place. For a letter which had originally contained two documents and had
been addressed to J. Perrison, Esq., now contained three and was
consigned to Miss Sybil Daventry. Which merely goes to show how careful
one should be over posting letters.</p><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>IV</p></blockquote></div><p>"Good evening, Mr. Perrison. All well, and taking nourishment, so to
speak?"</p><p>Archie Longworth lounged into the hall, almost colliding with the other
man.</p><p>"You look pensive," he continued, staring at him blandly. "<span class="emphasis"><em>Agitato,
fortissimo.</em></span> Has aught occurred to disturb your masterly composure?"</p><p>But Mr. Perrison was in no mood for fooling: a message he had just
received over the telephone had very considerably disturbed his
composure.</p><p>"Let me have a look at that paper," he snapped, making a grab at it.</p><p>"Tush! Tush!" murmured Archie. "Manners, laddie, manners! You've
forgotten that little word."</p><p>And then at the far end of the hall he saw the girl, and caught his
breath. For the last two days he had almost forgotten her in the stress
of other things; now the bitterness of what had to come rose suddenly in
his throat and choked him.</p><p>"There is the paper. Run away and play in a corner."</p><p>Then he went forward to meet her with his usual lazy smile.</p><p>"What's happened?" she cried, a little breathlessly.</p><p>"Heaps of things," he said, gently. "Heaps of things. The principal one
being that a very worthless sinner loves a very beautiful girl—as he
never believed it could be given to man to love." His voice broke and
faltered: then he went on steadily. "And the next one—which is really
even more important—is that the very beautiful girl will receive a
letter in a long envelope by to–night's mail. The address will be typed,
the postmark Strand. I do not want the beautiful girl to open it except
in my presence. You understand?"</p><p>"I understand," she whispered, and her eyes were shining.</p><p>"Have you seen this?" Perrison's voice—shaking with rage—made
Longworth swing round.</p><p>"Seen what, dear lad?" he murmured, taking the paper. "Robbery in
City—is that what you mean? Dear, dear—what dastardly outrages do go
unpunished these days! Messrs. Smith and Co. Really! Watchman bound and
gagged. Safe rifled. Work of a master hand. Still, though I quite
understand your horror as a law–abiding citizen at such a thing, why
this thusness? I mean—altruism is wonderful, laddie; but it seems to me
that it's jolly old Smith and Co. who are up the pole."</p><p>He burbled on genially, serenely unconscious of the furious face of the
other man.</p><p>"I'm trying to think where I've met you before, Mr. Longworth," snarled
Perrison.</p><p>"Never, surely," murmured the other. "Those classic features, I feel
sure, would have been indelibly printed on my mind. Perhaps in some
mission, Mr. Perrison—some evangelical revival meeting. Who knows? And
there, if I mistake not, is the mail."</p><p>He glanced at the girl, and she was staring at him wonderingly. Just for
one moment did he show her what she wanted to know—just for one moment
did she give him back the answer which was to him the sweetest and at
the same time the most bitter in the world. Then he crossed the hall and
picked up the letters.</p><p>"A business one for you, Miss Daventry," he murmured, mildly. "Better
open it at once, and get our business expert's advice. Mr. Perrison is a
wonderful fellah for advice."</p><p>With trembling fingers she opened the envelope, and, as he saw the
contents, Perrison, with a snarl of ungovernable fury, made as if to
snatch them out of her hand. The next moment he felt as if his arm was
broken, and the blue eyes boring into his brain were no longer lazy.</p><p>"You forgot yourself, Mr. Perrison," said Archie Longworth, gently.
"Don't do that again."</p><p>"But I don't understand," cried the girl, bewildered. "What are these
papers?"</p><p>"May I see?" Longworth held out his hand, and she gave them to him at
once.</p><p>"They're stolen." Perrison's face was livid. "Give them to me, curse
you."</p><p>"Control yourself, you horrible blighter," said Longworth, icily.
"This," he continued, calmly, "would appear to be a receipt from Messrs.
Gross and Sons for the return of a pearl–necklace—sent out to Mr.
Daventry on approval."</p><p>"But you said he'd bought it and pawned it." She turned furiously on
Perrison.</p><p>"So he did," snarled that gentleman. "That's a forgery."</p><p>"Is it?" said Longworth. "That strikes me as being Johnson's signature.
Firm's official paper. And—er—he has the necklace, I—er—assume."</p><p>"Yes—he has the necklace. Stolen last night by—by―" His eyes were
fixed venomously on Longworth.</p><p>"Go on," murmured the other. "You're being most entertaining."</p><p>But a sudden change had come over Perrison's face—a dawning
recognition. "By God!" he muttered, "you're—you're―"</p><p>"Yes. I'm—who? It'll come in time, laddie—if you give it a chance. And
in the meantime we might examine these other papers. Now, this appears
to my inexperienced eye to be a transaction entered into on the one part
by Messrs. Smith and Co. and on the other by William Daventry. And it
concerns filthy lucre. Dear, dear. Twenty–five per cent. per month.
Three hundred per cent. Positive usury, Mr. Perrison. Don't you agree
with me? A rapacious bloodsucker is Mr. Smith."</p><p>But the other man was not listening: full recollection had come to him,
and with a cold look of triumph he put his hands into his pockets and
laughed.</p><p>"Very pretty," he remarked. "Very pretty indeed. And how, in your
vernacular, do you propose to get away with the swag, Mr. Flash Pete? I
rather think the police—whom I propose to call up on the 'phone in one
minute—will be delighted to see such an old and elusive friend."</p><p>He glanced at the girl, and laughed again at the look on her face.</p><p>"What's he mean, Archie?" she cried, wildly. "What's he mean?"</p><p>"I mean," Perrison sneered, "that Mr. Archie Longworth is what is
generally described as a swell crook with a reputation in certain
unsavoury circles extending over two or three continents. And the
police, whom I propose to ring up, will welcome him as a long–lost
child."</p><p>He walked towards the telephone, and with a little gasp of fear the girl
turned to Archie.</p><p>"Say it's not true, dear—say it's not true."</p><p>For a moment he looked at her with a whimsical smile; then he sat down
on the high fender round the open fire.</p><p>"I think, Mr. Perrison," he murmured, gently, "that if I were you I
would not be too precipitate over ringing up the police. The engaging
warrior who sent this letter to Miss Daventry put in yet one more
enclosure."</p><p>Perrison turned round: then he stood very still.</p><p>"A most peculiar document," continued the man by the fire, in the same
gentle voice, "which proves very conclusively that amongst their other
activities Messrs. Smith and Co. are not only the receivers of stolen
goods, but are mixed up with illicit diamond buying."</p><p>In dead silence the two men stared at one another; then Longworth spoke
again.</p><p>"I shall keep these three documents, Mr. Perrison, as a safeguard for
your future good behaviour. Mr. Daventry can pay a certain fair sum or
not as he likes—that is his business: and I shall make a point of
explaining exactly to him who and what you are—and Smith—and Gross.
But should you be disposed to make any trouble over the necklace—or
should the idea get abroad that Flash Pete was responsible for the
burglary last night—it will be most unfortunate for you—most. This
document would interest Scotland Yard immensely."</p><p>Perrison's face had grown more and more livid as he listened, and when
the quiet voice ceased, unmindful of the girl standing by, he began to
curse foully and hideously. The next moment he cowered back, as two iron
hands gripped his shoulders and shook him till his teeth rattled.</p><p>"Stop, you filthy swine," snarled Longworth, "or I'll break every bone
in your body. Quite a number of men are blackguards, Perrison—but
you're a particularly creeping and repugnant specimen. Now—get out—and
do it quickly. The nine–thirty will do you nicely. And don't forget what
I've just said: because, as there's a God above, I mean it."</p><p>"I'll be even with you for this some day, Flash Pete," said the other
venomously over his shoulder. "And then―"</p><p>"And then," said Longworth, contemptuously, "we will resume this
discussion. Just now—get out."</p><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>V</p></blockquote></div><p>"Yes: it is quite true." She had known it was—and yet, womanlike, she
had clung to the hope that there was some mistake—some explanation. And
now, alone with the man she had grown to love, the faint hope died. With
his lazy smile, he stared down at her—a smile so full of sorrow and
pain that she could not bear to see it.</p><p>"I'm Flash Pete—with an unsavoury reputation, as our friend so kindly
told you, in three continents. It was I who broke open the safe at
Smith's last night, I who got the receipt from Gross. You see, I spotted
the whole trick from the beginning; as I said, I had inside information.
And Perrison is Smith and Co.; moreover he's very largely Gross as
well—and half a dozen other rotten things in addition. The whole thing
was worked with one end in view right from the beginning: the girl your
brother originally bought the pearls for was in it; it was she who
suggested the pawning. Bill told me that the night before last." He
sighed and paced two or three times up and down the dim–lit
conservatory. And after a while he stopped in front of her again, and
his blue eyes were very tender.</p><p>"Just a common sneak–thief—just a common worthless sinner. And he's
very, very glad that he has been privileged to help the most beautiful
girl in all the world. Don't cry, my dear, don't cry: there's nothing
about that sinner's that's worth a single tear of yours. You must forget
his wild presumption in falling in love with that beautiful girl: his
only excuse is that he couldn't help it. And maybe, in the days to come,
the girl will think kindly every now and then of a man known to some as
Archie Longworth—known to others as Flash Pete—known to himself
as—well, we won't bother about that."</p><p>He bent quickly and raised her hand to his lips; then he was gone almost
before she had realised it. And if he heard her little gasping
cry—"Archie, my man, come back—I love you so!" he gave no sign.</p><p>For in his own peculiar code a very worthless sinner must remain a very
worthless sinner to the end—and he must run the course alone.</p></section><footer/></body></html>