<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>IX: Jimmy Lethbridge's Temptation I</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch08.xhtml" title="VIII: When Greek Meets Greek I"/><link rel="next" href="ch10.xhtml" title="X: Lady Cynthia and the Hermit I"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="IX: Jimmy Lethbridge's Temptation I" epub:type="chapter" id="id860"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">IX: Jimmy Lethbridge's Temptation I</h1></div></div></div><p>"What a queer little place, Jimmy!" The girl glanced round the tiny
restaurant with frank interest, and the man looked up from the menu he
was studying with a grin.</p><p>"Don't let François hear you say that, or you'll be asked to leave." The
head–waiter was already bearing down on them, his face wreathed in an
expansive smile of welcome. "To him it is the only restaurant in
London."</p><p>"Ah, m'sieur! it is long days since you were here." The little Frenchman
rubbed his hands together delightedly. "And mam'selle—it is your first
visit to Les Coquelins, n'est–ce–pas?"</p><p>"But not the last, I hope, François," said the girl with a gentle smile.</p><p>"Ah, mais non!" Outraged horror at such an impossible idea shone all
over the head–waiter's face. "My guests, mam'selle, they come here once
to see what it is like—and they return because they know what it is
like."</p><p>Jimmy Lethbridge laughed.</p><p>"There you are, Molly," he cried. "Now you know what's expected of you.
Nothing less than once a week—eh, François?"</p><p>"Mais oui, m'sieur. There are some who come every night." He produced
his pencil and stood waiting. "A few oysters," he murmured. "They are
good ce soir: real Whitstables. And a bird, M'sieur Lethbridge—with an
omelette aux fines herbes―"</p><p>"Sounds excellent, François," laughed the man. "Anyway, I know that once
you have decided—argument is futile."</p><p>"It is my work," answered the waiter, shrugging his shoulders. "And a
bottle of Corton—with the chill just off. Toute de suite."</p><p>François bustled away, and the girl looked across the table with a
faintly amused smile in her big grey eyes.</p><p>"He fits the place, Jimmy. You must bring me here again."</p><p>"Just as often as you like, Molly," answered the man quietly, and after
a moment the girl turned away. "You know," he went on steadily, "how
much sooner I'd bring you to a spot like this, than go to the Ritz or
one of those big places. Only I was afraid it might bore you. I love it:
it's so much more intimate."</p><p>"Why should you think it would bore me?" she asked, drawing off her
gloves and resting her hands on the table in front of her. They were
beautiful hands, ringless save for one plain signet ring on the little
finger of her left hand. And, almost against his will, the man found
himself staring at it as he answered:</p><p>"Because I can't trust myself, dear; I can't trust myself to amuse you,"
he answered slowly. "I can't trust myself not to make love to you—and
it's so much easier here than in the middle of a crowd whom one knows."</p><p>The girl sighed a little sadly.</p><p>"Oh, Jimmy, I wish I could! You've been such an absolute dear. Give me a
little longer, old man, and then—perhaps―"</p><p>"My dear," said the man hoarsely, "I don't want to hurry you. I'm
willing to wait years for you—years. At least"—he smiled
whimsically—"I'm not a little bit willing to wait years—really. But if
it's that or nothing—then, believe me, I'm more than willing."</p><p>"I've argued it out with myself, Jimmy." And now she was staring at the
signet ring on her finger. "And when I've finished the argument, I know
that I'm not a bit further on. You can't argue over things like that.
I've told myself times out of number that it isn't fair to you―"</p><p>He started to speak, but she stopped him with a smile.</p><p>"No, dear man, it is not fair to you—whatever you like to say. It isn't
fair to you even though you may agree to go on waiting. No one has a
right to ask another person to wait indefinitely, though I'm thinking
that is exactly what I've been doing. Which is rather like a woman," and
once again she smiled half sadly.</p><p>"But I'm willing to wait, dear," he repeated gently. "And then I'm
willing to take just as much as you care to give. I won't worry you,
Molly; I won't ask you for anything you don't feel like granting me. You
see, I know now that Peter must always come first. I had hoped that
you'd forget him; I still hope, dear, that in time you will―"</p><p>She shook her head, and the man bit his lip.</p><p>"Well, even if you don't, Molly," he went on steadily, "is it fair to
yourself to go on when you know it's hopeless? There can be no doubt now
that he's dead; you know it yourself—you've taken off your engagement
ring—and is it fair to—you? Don't worry about me for the moment—but
what is the use? Isn't it better to face facts?"</p><p>The girl gave a little laugh that was half a sob.</p><p>"Of course it is, Jimmy. Much better. I always tell myself that in my
arguments." Then she looked at him steadily across the table. "You'd be
content, Jimmy—would you?—with friendship at first."</p><p>"Yes," he answered quietly. "I would be content with friendship."</p><p>"And you wouldn't bother me—ah, no! forgive me, I know you wouldn't.
Because, Jimmy, I don't want there to be any mistake. People think I've
got over it because I go about; in some ways I have. But I seem to have
lost something—some part of me. I don't think I shall ever be able to
<span class="emphasis"><em>love</em></span> a man again. I like you, Jimmy—like you most frightfully—but I
don't know whether I'll ever be able to love you in the way I loved
Peter."</p><p>"I know that," muttered the man. "And I'll risk it."</p><p>"You dear!" said the girl—and her eyes were shining. "That's where the
unfairness comes in. You're worth the very best—and I can't promise to
give it to you."</p><p>"You are the very best, whatever you give me," answered the man quietly.
"I'd sooner have anything from you than everything from another woman.
Oh, my dear!" he burst out, "I didn't mean to worry you to–night—though
I knew this damned restaurant would be dangerous—but can't you say yes?
I swear you'll never regret it, dear—and I—I'll be quite content to
know that you care just a bit."</p><p>For a while the girl was silent; then with a faint smile she looked at
him across the table.</p><p>"All right, Jimmy," she said.</p><p>"You mean you will, Molly?" he cried, a little breathlessly.</p><p>And the girl nodded.</p><p>"Yes, old man," she answered steadily. "I mean I will."</p><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>·    ·    ·    ·    ·</p></blockquote></div><p>It was two hours later when Molly Daventry went slowly upstairs to her
room and shut the door. Jimmy Lethbridge had just gone; she had just
kissed him. And the echo of his last whispered words—"My dear! my very
dear girl!"—was still sounding in her ears.</p><p>For a while she stood by the fireplace smiling a little sadly. Then she
crossed the room and switched on a special light. It was so placed that
it shone directly on the photograph of an officer in the full dress of
the 9th Hussars. And at length she knelt down in front of the table on
which the photograph stood, so that the light fell on her own face
also—glinting through the red–gold of her hair, glistening in the
mistiness of her eyes. For maybe five minutes she knelt there, till it
seemed to her as if a smile twitched round the lips of the officer—a
human smile, an understanding smile.</p><p>"Oh, Peter!" she whispered, "he was your pal. Forgive me, my
love—forgive me. He's been such a dear."</p><p>And once again the photograph seemed to smile at her tenderly.</p><p>"It's only you, Peter, till Journey's End—but I must give him the next
best, mustn't I? It's only fair, isn't it?—and you hated unfairness.
But, dear God! it's hard."</p><p>Slowly she stretched out her left hand, so that the signet ring touched
the big silver frame.</p><p>"Your ring, Peter," she whispered, "your dear ring."</p><p>And with a sudden little choking gasp she raised it to her lips.</p><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>II</p></blockquote></div><p>It was in a side–street close to High Street, Kensington, that it
happened—the unbelievable thing. Fate decided to give Jimmy two months
of happiness; cynically allowed him to come within a fortnight of his
wedding, and then―</p><p>For a few seconds he couldn't believe his eyes; he stood staring like a
man bereft of his senses. There on the opposite side of the road,
playing a barrel–organ, was Peter himself—Peter, who had been reported
"Missing, believed killed," three years before. Peter, whom a sergeant
had categorically said he had seen killed with his own eyes. And there
he was playing a barrel–organ in the streets of London.</p><p>Like a man partially dazed Jimmy Lethbridge went over towards him. As he
approached the player smiled genially, and touched his cap with his free
hand. Then after a while the smile faded, and he stared at Jimmy
suspiciously.</p><p>"My God, Peter!" Lethbridge heard himself say, "what are you doing this
for?"</p><p>And as he spoke he saw a girl approaching—a girl who placed herself
aggressively beside Peter.</p><p>"Why shouldn't I?" demanded the player. "And who the hell are you
calling Peter?"</p><p>"But," stammered Jimmy, "don't you know me, old man?"</p><p>"No!" returned the other truculently. "And I don't want to, neither."</p><p>"A ruddy torf, 'e is, Bill," chimed in the girl.</p><p>"Good God!" muttered Lethbridge, even then failing to understand the
situation. "You playing a barrel–organ!"</p><p>"Look here, 'op it, guv'nor." Peter spoke with dangerous calmness. "I
don't want no blinking scenes 'ere. The police ain't too friendly as it
is, and this is my best pitch."</p><p>"But why didn't you let your pals know you were back, old man?" said
Jimmy feebly. "Your governor, and all of us?"</p><p>"See 'ere, mister," the girl stepped forward, "'e ain't got no
pals—only me. Ain't that so, Billy?" she turned to the man, who nodded.</p><p>"I looks after him, I do, d'yer see?" went on the girl. "And I don't
want no one coming butting their ugly heads in. It worries 'im, it
does."</p><p>"But do you mean to say―" began Jimmy dazedly, and then he broke off.
At last he understood, something if not all. In some miraculous way
Peter had not been killed; Peter was there in front of him—but a new
Peter; a Peter whose memory of the past had completely gone, whose mind
was as blank as a clean–washed slate.</p><p>"How long have you been doing this?" he asked quietly.</p><p>"Never you mind," said the girl sharply. "He ain't nothing to you. I
looks after 'im, I do."</p><p>Not for a second did Jimmy hesitate, though deep down inside him there
came a voice that whispered—"Don't be a fool! Pretend it's a mistake.
Clear off! Molly will never know." And if for a moment his hands
clenched with the strength of the sudden hideous temptation, his voice
was calm and quiet as he spoke.</p><p>"That's where you're wrong." He looked at her gently. "He is something
to me—my greatest friend, whom I thought was dead."</p><p>And now Peter was staring at him fixedly, forgetting even to turn the
handle of the machine.</p><p>"I don't remember yer, guv'nor," he said, and Jimmy flinched at the
appalling accent. "I've kind o' lost my memory, yer see, and Lizzie 'ere
looks after me."</p><p>"I know she does," continued Jimmy quietly. "Thank you, Lizzie, thank
you a thousand times. But I want you both to come to this house
to–night." He scribbled the address of his rooms on a slip of paper. "We
must think what is best to be done. You see, Lizzie, it's not quite fair
to him, is it? I want to get a good doctor to see him."</p><p>"I'm quite 'appy as I am, sir," said Peter. "I don't want no doctors
messing about with me."</p><p>"Yer'd better go, Bill." The girl turned to him. "The gentleman seems
kind. But"—she swung round on Jimmy fiercely—"you ain't going to take
'im away from me, guv'nor? 'E's mine, yer see—mine―"</p><p>"I want you to come with him to–night, Lizzie," said Lethbridge gravely.
"I'm not going to try and take him away from you. I promise that. But
will you promise to come? It's for his sake I ask you to bring him."</p><p>For a while she looked at him half fearfully; then she glanced at Peter,
who had apparently lost interest in the matter. And at last she muttered
under her breath: "Orl right—I'll bring him. But 'e's mine—mine. An'
don't yer go forgetting it."</p><p>And Jimmy, walking slowly into the main street, carried with him the
remembrance of a small determined face with the look on it of a mother
fighting for her young. That and Peter; poor dazed memory–lost
Peter—his greatest pal.</p><p>At first, as he turned towards Piccadilly, he grasped nothing save the
one stupendous fact that Peter was not dead. Then, as he walked on,
gradually the realisation of what it meant to him personally came to his
mind. And with that realisation there returned with redoubled force the
insidious tempting voice that had first whispered: "Molly will never
know." She would never know—could never know—unless he told her. And
Peter was happy; he'd said so. And the girl was happy—Lizzie. And
perhaps—in fact most likely—Peter would never recover his memory. So
what was the use? Why say anything about it? Why not say it was a
mistake when they came that evening? And Jimmy put his hand to his
forehead and found it was wet with sweat.</p><p>After all, if Peter didn't recover, it would only mean fearful
unhappiness for everyone. He wouldn't know Molly, and it would break her
heart, and the girl's, and—but, of course, <span class="emphasis"><em>he</em></span> didn't count. It was
the others he was thinking of—not himself.</p><p>He turned into the Park opposite the Albert Hall, and passers–by eyed
him strangely, though he was supremely unaware of the fact. But when all
the demons of hell are fighting inside a man, his face is apt to look
grey and haggard. And as he walked slowly towards Hyde Park Corner,
Jimmy Lethbridge went through his Gethsemane. They thronged him;
pressing in on him from all sides, and he cursed the devils out loud.
But still they came back, again and again, and the worst and most
devilish of them all was the insidious temptation that by keeping silent
he would be doing the greatest good for the greatest number. Everyone
was happy now—why run the risk of altering things?</p><p>And then, because it is not good that man should be tempted till he
breaks, the Fate that had led him to Peter, led him gently out of the
Grim Garden into Peace once more. He gave a short hard laugh which was
almost a sob, and turning into Knightsbridge he hailed a taxi. It was as
it drew up at the door of Molly's house that he laughed again—a laugh
that had lost its hardness. And the driver thought his fare's "Thank
you" was addressed to him. Perhaps it was. Perhaps it was the first time
Jimmy had prayed for ten years.</p><p>"Why, Jimmy, old man—you're early, I'm not dressed yet." Molly met him
in the hall, and he smiled at her gravely.</p><p>"Do you mind, dear," he said, "if I cry off to–night? I've got a very
important engagement—even more important than taking you out to dinner,
if possible."</p><p>The smile grew whimsical, and he put both his hands on her shoulders.</p><p>"It concerns my wedding present for you," he added.</p><p>"From the bridegroom to the bride?" she laughed.</p><p>"Something like that," he said, turning away abruptly.</p><p>"Of course, dear," she answered. "As a matter of fact, I've got a bit of
a head. Though what present you can be getting at this time of day, I
can't think."</p><p>"You mustn't try to," said Jimmy. "It's a surprise, Molly—a surprise.
Pray God you like it, and that it will be a success!"</p><p>He spoke low under his breath, and the girl looked at him curiously.</p><p>"What's the matter, dear?" she cried. "Has something happened?"</p><p>Jimmy Lethbridge pulled himself together; he didn't want her to suspect
anything yet.</p><p>"Good heavens, no!" he laughed. "What should have? But I want to borrow
something from you, Molly dear, and I don't want you to ask any
questions. I want you to lend me that photograph of Peter that you've
got—the one in full dress."</p><p>And now she was staring at him wonderingly.</p><p>"Jimmy," she said breathlessly, "does it concern the present?"</p><p>"Yes; it concerns the present."</p><p>"You're going to have a picture of him painted for me?"</p><p>"Something like that," he answered quietly.</p><p>"Oh, you dear!" she whispered, "you dear! I've been thinking about it
for months. I'll get it for you."</p><p>She went upstairs, and the man stood still in the hall staring after
her. And he was still standing motionless as she came down again, the
precious frame clasped in her hands.</p><p>"You'll take care of it, Jimmy?" she said, and he nodded.</p><p>Then for a moment she laid her hand on his arm.</p><p>"I don't think, old man," she said quietly, "that you'll have to wait
very long with friendship only."</p><p>The next moment she was alone with the slam of the front–door echoing in
her ears. It was like Fate to reserve its most deadly arrow for the end.</p><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>III</p></blockquote></div><p>"You say he has completely lost his memory?"</p><p>Mainwaring, one of the most brilliant of London's younger surgeons,
leaned back in his chair and looked thoughtfully at his host.</p><p>"Well, he didn't know me, and I was his greatest friend," said
Lethbridge.</p><p>The two men were in Jimmy's rooms, waiting for the arrival of Peter and
the girl.</p><p>"He looked at me without a trace of recognition," continued Lethbridge.
"And he's developed a typical lower–class Cockney accent."</p><p>"Interesting, very," murmured the surgeon, getting up and examining the
photograph on the table. "This is new, isn't it, old boy; I've never
seen it before?"</p><p>"I borrowed it this afternoon," said Jimmy briefly.</p><p>"From his people, I suppose? Do they know?"</p><p>"No one knows at present, Mainwaring—except you and me. That photograph
I got this afternoon from Miss Daventry."</p><p>Something in his tone made the surgeon swing round.</p><p>"You mean your fiancée?" he said slowly.</p><p>"Yes—my fiancée. You see, she was—she was engaged to Peter. And she
thinks he's dead. That is the only reason she got engaged to me."</p><p>For a moment there was silence, while Mainwaring stared at the other. A
look of wonder had come into the doctor's eyes—wonder mixed with a
dawning admiration.</p><p>"But, my God! old man," he muttered at length, "if the operation is
successful―"</p><p>"Can you think of a better wedding present to give a girl than the man
she loves?" said Jimmy slowly, and the doctor turned away. There are
times when it is not good to look on another man's face.</p><p>"And if it isn't successful?" he said quietly.</p><p>"God knows, Bill. I haven't got as far as that—yet."</p><p>And it was at that moment that there came a ring at the front–door bell.
There was a brief altercation; then Jimmy's man appeared.</p><p>"Two—er—persons say you told them―" he began, when Lethbridge cut
him short.</p><p>"Show them in at once," he said briefly, and his man went out again.</p><p>"You've got to remember, Bill," said Jimmy as they waited, "that Peter
Staunton is literally, at the moment, a low–class Cockney."</p><p>Mainwaring nodded, and drew back a little as Peter and the girl came
into the room. He wanted to leave the talking to Jimmy, while he
watched.</p><p>"Good evening, Lizzie," Lethbridge smiled at the girl reassuringly. "I'm
glad you came."</p><p>"Who's that cove?" demanded the girl suspiciously, staring at
Mainwaring.</p><p>"A doctor," said Jimmy. "I want him to have a look at Peter later on."</p><p>"His name ain't Peter," muttered the girl sullenly. "It's Bill."</p><p>"Well, at Bill, then. Don't be frightened, Lizzie; come farther into the
room. I want you to see a photograph I've got here."</p><p>Like a dog who wonders whether it is safe to go to a stranger, she
advanced slowly, one step at a time; while Peter, twirling his cap
awkwardly in his hands, kept beside her. Once or twice he glanced
uneasily round the room, but otherwise his eyes were fixed on Lizzie as
a child looks at its mother when it's scared.</p><p>"My God, Jimmy!" whispered the doctor, "there's going to be as big a
sufferer as you if we're successful."</p><p>And he was looking as he spoke at the girl, who, with a sudden
instinctive feeling of protection, had put out her hand and taken
Peter's.</p><p>Like a pair of frightened children they crept on until they came to the
photograph; then they stopped in front of it. And the two men came a
little closer. It was the girl who spoke first, in a low voice of
wondering awe:</p><p>"Gawd! it's you, Bill—that there bloke in the frame. You were a
blinking orficer."</p><p>With a look of pathetic pride on her face, she stared first at the
photograph and then at the man beside her. "An orficer! Bill—an
orficer! What was 'is regiment, mister?" The girl swung round on Jimmy.
"Was 'e in the Guards?"</p><p>"No, Lizzie," said Lethbridge. "Not the Guards. He was in the cavalry.
The 9th Hussars," and the man, who was holding the frame foolishly in
his hands, suddenly looked up. "The Devil's Own, Peter," went on
Lethbridge quietly. "C Squadron of the Devil's Own."</p><p>But the look had faded; Peter's face was blank again.</p><p>"I don't remember, guv'nor," he muttered. "And it's making me 'ead
ache—this."</p><p>With a little cry the girl caught his arm, and faced Lethbridge
fiercely.</p><p>"Wot's the good of all this?" she cried. "All this muckin' abaht? Why
the 'ell can't you leave 'im alone, guv'nor? 'E's going to 'ave one of
'is 'eads now—'e nearly goes mad, 'e does, when 'e gets 'em."</p><p>"I think, Lizzie, that perhaps I can cure those heads of his."</p><p>It was Mainwaring speaking, and the girl, still holding Peter's arm
protectingly, looked from Lethbridge to the doctor.</p><p>"And I want to examine him, in another room where the light is a little
better. Just quite alone, where he won't be distracted."</p><p>But instantly the girl was up in arms.</p><p>"You're taking 'im away from me—that's wot yer doing. And I won't 'ave
it. Yer don't want to go, Bill, do yer? Yer don't want to leave yer
Liz?"</p><p>And Jimmy Lethbridge bit his lip; Mainwaring had been right.</p><p>"I'm not going to take him away, Lizzie," said the doctor gently. "I
promise you that. You shall see him the very instant I've made my
examination. But if you're there, you see, you'll distract his
attention."</p><p>She took a step forward, staring at the doctor as if she would read his
very soul. And in the infinite pathos of the scene, Jimmy Lethbridge for
the moment forgot his own suffering. Lizzie—the little slum
girl—fighting for her man against something she couldn't understand;
wondering if she should trust these two strangers. Caught in a net that
frightened her; fearful that they were going to harm Bill. And at the
bottom of everything the wild, inarticulate terror that she was going to
lose him.</p><p>"You swear it?" she muttered. "I can see 'im after yer've looked at
'im."</p><p>"I swear it," said Mainwaring gravely.</p><p>She gave a little sob. "Orl right, I believe yer on the level. You go
with 'im, Bill. Perhaps 'e'll do yer 'ead good."</p><p>"'E's queer sometimes at night," said Lizzie, as the door closed behind
Mainwaring. "Seems all dazed like."</p><p>"Is he?" said Jimmy. "How did you find him, Lizzie?"</p><p>"'E was wandering round—didn't know nuthing about 'imself," she
answered. "And I took 'im in—and looked after 'im, I did. Saved and
pinched a bit, 'ere and there—and then we've the barrel–organ. And
we've been so 'appy, mister—so 'appy. Course 'e's a bit queer, and 'e
don't remember nuthing—but 'e's orl right if 'e don't get 'is
'eadaches. And when 'e does, I gets rid of them. I jest puts 'is 'ead on
me lap and strokes 'is forehead—and they goes after a while. Sometimes
'e goes to sleep when I'm doing it—and I stops there till 'e wakes
again with the 'ead gone. Yer see, I understands 'im. 'E's 'appy with
me."</p><p>She was staring at the photograph—a pathetic little figure in her
tawdry finery—and for a moment Jimmy couldn't speak. It had to be done;
he had to do it—but it felt rather like killing a wounded bird with a
sledge–hammer—except that it wouldn't be so quick.</p><p>"He's a great brain surgeon, Lizzie—the gentleman with Bill," he said
at length, and the girl turned round and watched him gravely. "And he
thinks that an operation might cure him and give him back his memory."</p><p>"So that 'e'd know 'e was an orficer?" whispered the girl.</p><p>"So that he'd know he was an officer," said Jimmy. "So that he'd
remember all his past life. You see, Lizzie, your Bill is really Sir
Peter Staunton—whom we all thought had been killed in the war."</p><p>"Sir Peter Staunton!" she repeated dazedly. "Gawd!"</p><p>"He was engaged, Lizzie," he went on quietly, and he heard her breath
come quick—"engaged to that lady." He pointed to a picture of Sybil on
the mantelpiece.</p><p>"No one wouldn't look at me with 'er about," said the girl thoughtfully.</p><p>"She loved him very dearly, Lizzie—even as he loved her. I don't think
I've ever known two people who loved one another quite so much. And―"
for a moment Jimmy faltered, then he went on steadily: "I ought to know
in this case, because I'm engaged to her now."</p><p>And because the Cockney brain is quick, she saw—and understood.</p><p>"So if yer doctor friend succeeds," she said, "she'll give yer the
chuck?"</p><p>"Yes, Lizzie," answered Jimmy gravely, "she'll give me the chuck."</p><p>"And yer love 'er? Orl right, old sport. I can see it in yer face.
Strikes me"—and she gave a little laugh that was sadder than any
tears—"strikes me you 'anded out the dirty end of the stick to both of
us when you come round that street to–day."</p><p>"Strikes me I did, Lizzie," he agreed. "But, you see, I've told you this
because I want you to understand that we're both of us in it—we've both
of us got to play the game."</p><p>"Play the game!" she muttered. "Wot d'yer want me to do?"</p><p>"The doctor doesn't want him excited, Lizzie," explained Lethbridge.
"But he wants him to stop here to–night, so that he can operate
to–morrow. Will you tell him that you want him to stop here?—and stay
here with him if you like."</p><p>"And to–morrer she'll tike 'im." The girl was staring at Sybil's
photograph. "'E won't look at me—when 'e knows. Gawd! why did yer find
'im—why did yer find 'im? We was 'appy, I tells yer—'appy!"</p><p>She was crying now—crying as a child cries, weakly and pitifully, and
Lethbridge stood watching her in silence.</p><p>"Poor kid!" he said at length. "Poor little kid!"</p><p>"I don't want yer pity," she flared up. "I want my man." And then, as
she saw Jimmy looking at the photograph on the mantelpiece, in an
instant she was beside him. "Sorry, old sport," she whispered
impulsively. "Reckon you've backed a ruddy loser yourself. I'll do it.
Shake 'ands. I guess I knew all along that Bill wasn't really my style.
And I've 'ad my year."</p><p>"You're lucky, Lizzie," said Jimmy gravely, still holding her hand.
"Very, very lucky."</p><p>"I've 'ad my year," she went on, and for a moment her thoughts seemed
far away. "A 'ole year—and―" she pulled herself together and started
patting her hair.</p><p>"And what, Lizzie?" said Jimmy quietly.</p><p>"Never you mind, mister," she answered. "That's my blooming business."</p><p>And then the door opened and Mainwaring came in.</p><p>"Does Lizzie agree?" he asked eagerly.</p><p>"Yes, Bill—she agrees," said Jimmy. "What do you think of him?"</p><p>"As far as I can see there is every hope that an operation will be
completely successful. There is evidently pressure on the right side of
the skull which can be removed. I'll operate early to–morrow morning.
Keep him quiet to–night—and make him sleep, Lizzie, if you can."</p><p>"What d'yer think, mister?" she said scornfully. "Ain't I done it fer a
year?"</p><p>Without another word she left the room, and the two men stood staring at
one another.</p><p>"Will she play the game, Jimmy!" Mainwaring was lighting a cigarette.</p><p>"Yes—she'll play the game," answered Lethbridge slowly. "She'll play
the game—poor little kid!"</p><p>"What terms are they on—those two?" The doctor looked at him curiously.</p><p>"I think," said Lethbridge even more slowly, "that that is a question we
had better not inquire into too closely."</p><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>IV</p></blockquote></div><p>It was successful—brilliantly successful—the operation. Lizzie made it
so; at any rate she helped considerably. It was she who held his hand as
he went under the anæsthetic; it was she who cheered him up in the
morning, when he awoke dazed and frightened in a strange room. And then
she slipped away and disappeared from the house. It was only later that
Lethbridge found a scrawled pencil note, strangely smudged, on his desk:</p><p>"Let me no wot appens.—LIZZIE."</p><p>He didn't know her address, so he couldn't write and tell her that her
Bill had come to consciousness again, completely recovered except for
one thing. There was another blank in his mind now—the last three
years. One of his first questions had been to ask how the fight had
gone, and whether we'd broken through properly.</p><p>And then for a day or two Lizzie was forgotten; he had to make his own
renunciation.</p><p>Molly came, a little surprised at his unusual invitation, and he left
the door open so that she could see Peter in bed from one part of his
sitting–room.</p><p>"Where have you buried yourself, Jimmy?" she cried. "I've been―" And
then her face grew deathly white as she looked into the bedroom. Her
lips moved, though no sound came from them; her hands were clenching and
unclenching.</p><p>"But I'm mad," he heard her whisper at length, "quite mad. I'm seeing
things, Jimmy—seeing things. Why—dear God! it's Peter!"</p><p>She took a step or two forward, and Peter saw her.</p><p>"Molly," he cried weakly, "Molly, my darling―"</p><p>And Jimmy Lethbridge saw her walk forward slowly and uncertainly to the
man who had come back. With a shaking little cry of pure joy she fell on
her knees beside the bed, and Peter put a trembling hand on her hair.
Then Jimmy shut the door, and stared blankly in front of him.</p><p>It was Lizzie who roused him—Lizzie coming shyly into the room from the
hall.</p><p>"I seed her come in," she whispered. "She looked orl right. 'Ow is 'e?"</p><p>"He's got his memory back, Lizzie," he said gently. "But he's forgotten
the last three years."</p><p>"Forgotten me, as 'e?" Her lips quivered.</p><p>"Yes, Lizzie. Forgotten everything—barrel–organ and all. He thinks he's
on sick leave from the war."</p><p>"And she's wiv 'im now, is she?"</p><p>"Yes—she's with him, Lizzie."</p><p>She took a deep breath—then she walked to the glass and arranged her
hat—a dreadful hat with feathers in it.</p><p>"Well, I reckons I'd better be going. I don't want to see 'im. It would
break me 'eart. And I said good–bye to 'im that last night before the
operation. So long, mister. I've 'ad me year—she can't tike that away
from me."</p><p>And then she was gone. He watched her from the window walking along the
pavement, with the feathers nodding at every step. Once she stopped and
looked back—and the feathers seemed to wilt and die. Then she went on
again—and this time she didn't stop. She'd "'ad 'er year," had Lizzie;
maybe the remembrance of it helped her gallant little soul when she
returned the barrel–organ—the useless barrel–organ.</p><p>"So this was your present, Jimmy." Molly was speaking just behind him,
and her eyes were very bright.</p><p>"Yes, Molly," he smiled. "Do you like it?"</p><p>"I don't understand what's happened," she said slowly. "I don't
understand anything except the one big fact that Peter has come back."</p><p>"Isn't that enough?" he asked gently. "Isn't that enough, my dear?
Peter's come back—funny old Peter. The rest will keep."</p><p>And then he took her left hand and drew off the engagement ring he had
given her.</p><p>"Not on that finger now—Molly; though I'd like you to keep it now if
you will."</p><p>For a while she stared at him wonderingly.</p><p>"Jimmy, but you're big!" she whispered at length. "I'm so sorry!" She
turned away as Peter's voice, weak and tremulous, came from the other
room.</p><p>"Come in with me, old man," she said. "Come in and talk to him."</p><p>But Jimmy shook his head.</p><p>"He doesn't want me, dear; I'm just—just going out for a bit―"</p><p>Abruptly he left the room—they didn't want him: any more than they
wanted Lizzie.</p><p>Only she had had her year.</p></section><footer/></body></html>