<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>X: Lady Cynthia and the Hermit I</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch09.xhtml" title="IX: Jimmy Lethbridge's Temptation I"/><link rel="next" href="ch11.xhtml" title="XI: A Glass of Whisky"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="X: Lady Cynthia and the Hermit I" epub:type="chapter" id="id880"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">X: Lady Cynthia and the Hermit I</h1></div></div></div><p>"My dear Cynthia, you haven't seen our Hermit yet. He's quite the show
exhibit of the place."</p><p>Lady Cynthia Stockdale yawned and lit a cigarette. Hermits belonged
undoubtedly to the class of things in which she was <span class="emphasis"><em>not</em></span> interested;
the word conjured up a mental picture of a dirty individual of great
piety, clothed in a sack. And Lady Cynthia loathed dirt and detested
piety.</p><p>"A hermit, Ada!" she remarked, lazily. "I thought the brand was extinct.
Does he feed ravens and things?"</p><p>It is to be regretted that theological knowledge was not her strong
point, but Ada Laverton, her hostess, did not smile. From beneath some
marvellously long eyelashes she was watching the lovely girl lying back
in the deck–chair opposite, who was vainly trying to blow smoke rings. A
sudden wild idea had come into her brain—so wild as to be almost
laughable. But from time immemorial wild ideas anent their girl friends
have entered the brains of young married women, especially the lucky
ones who have hooked the right man. And Ada Laverton had undoubtedly
done that. She alternately bullied, cajoled, and made love to her
husband John, in a way that eminently suited that cheerful and easygoing
gentleman. He adored her quite openly and ridiculously, and she returned
the compliment just as ridiculously, even if not quite so openly.</p><p>Moreover, Cynthia Stockdale was her best friend. Before her marriage
they had been inseparable, and perhaps there was no one living who
understood Cynthia as she did. To the world at large Cynthia was merely
a much photographed and capricious beauty. Worthy mothers of daughters,
who saw her reproduced weekly in the society papers, sighed inwardly
with envy, and commented on the decadence of the aristocracy: the
daughters tore out the pictures in a vain endeavour to copy her frocks.
But it wasn't the frocks that made Cynthia Stockdale: it was she who
made the frocks. Put her in things selected haphazard from a jumble
sale—put her in remnants discarded by the people who got it up, and she
would still have seemed the best–dressed woman in the room. It was a
gift she had—not acquired, but natural.</p><p>Lady Cynthia was twenty–five, and looked four years younger. Since the
war she had been engaged twice—once to a man in the Blues, and once to
a young and ambitious member of Parliament. Neither had lasted long, and
on the second occasion people had said unkind things. They had called
her heartless and capricious, and she had scorned to contradict them. It
mattered nothing to her what people said: if they didn't like her they
could go away and have nothing to do with her. And since in her case it
wasn't a pose, but the literal truth, people did not go away. Only to
Ada Laverton did she give her real confidence: only to Ada Laverton did
she show the real soul that lay below the surface.</p><p>"I'm trying," she had said, lying in that same chair a year previously,
"I'm trying to find the real thing. I needn't marry if I don't want to;
I haven't got to marry for a home and a roof. And it's got to be the
right man. Of course I may make a mistake—a mistake which I shan't find
out till it's too late. But surely when one has found it out before it's
too late, it's better to acknowledge it at once. It's no good making a
second worse one by going through with it. I thought Arthur was all
right"—Arthur was the member of Parliament—"I'm awfully fond of Arthur
still. But I'm not the right wife for him. We jarred on one another in a
hundred little ways. And he hasn't got a sense of humour. I shall never
forget the shock I got when I first realised that. He seemed to think
that a sense of humour consisted of laughing at humorous things, of
seeing a jest as well as anyone else. He didn't seem to understand me
when I told him that the real sense of humour is often closer to tears
than laughter. Besides"—she had added inconsequently—"he had a
dreadful trick of whistling down my neck when we danced. No woman can be
expected to marry a permanent draught. And as for poor old Bill—well
Bill's an angel. I still adore Bill. He is, I think, the most supremely
handsome being I've ever seen in my life—especially when he's got his
full dress on. But, my dear, I blame myself over Bill. I ought to have
known it before I got engaged to him; as a matter of fact I did know it.
Bill is, without exception, the biggest fool in London. I thought his
face might atone for his lack of brains; I thought that perhaps if I
took him in hand he might do something in the House of Lords—his old
father can't live much longer—but I gave it up. He is simply incapable
of any coherent thought at all. He can't spell; he can't add, and once
when I asked him if he liked Rachmaninoff, he thought it was the man who
had built the Pyramids."</p><p>This and much more came back to Ada Laverton as she turned over in her
mind the sudden wild idea that had come to her. Above all things she
wanted to see Cynthia married; she was so utterly happy herself that she
longed for her friend to share it too. She knew, as no one else did,
what a wonderful wife and pal Cynthia would make to the right man. But
it must be the right man; it must be the real thing. And like a blinding
flash had come the thought of the Hermit—the Hermit who had come into
the neighbourhood six months previously, and taken the little farm
standing in the hollow overlooking the sea. For, as she frequently told
John, if it hadn't been for the fact that she was tied to a silly old
idiot of a husband, she'd have married the Hermit herself.</p><p>"No, he doesn't feed ravens," she remarked at length. "Only puppies. He
breeds Cairns and Aberdeens. We'll stroll up and see him after tea."</p><p>"A hermit breeding dogs!" Cynthia sat up lazily. "My dear, you intrigue
me."</p><p>"Oh! he's not a bad young man," said Ada Laverton, indifferently. "Quite
passable looking, D.S.O. and M.C. and that sort of thing. Been all over
the world, and is really quite interesting when you can get him to
talk."</p><p>"What sort of age?" asked her friend.</p><p>"Thirty to thirty–five. You shall see him. But you're not to go and turn
his head; he's very peaceful and happy as he is."</p><p>Lady Cynthia smiled.</p><p>"I don't think hermits are much in my line. A man's job is to be up and
doing; not to bury himself alive and breed dogs."</p><p>"You tell him so," said her hostess. "It will do him good."</p><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>II</p></blockquote></div><p>An excited rush of puppies—fat, bouncing, lolloping puppies; a stern
order: "Heel, you young blighters, heel!" in a pleasant, cheerful voice;
a laughing greeting from Ada Laverton, and Lady Cynthia Stockdale found
herself shaking hands with the Hermit. She shook hands as a man shakes
hands, with a firm, steady grasp, and she looked the person she was
greeting straight in the eyes. To her that first handshake meant, more
often than not, the final estimate of a stranger's character; it always
meant the first. And her first estimate of Desmond Brooke was good. She
saw a man of clear skin and clear eye. He wore no hat, and his brown
hair, curling a little at the temples, was slightly flecked with grey.
His face was bronzed and a faint smile hovered in the corners of the
eyes that met hers fair and square. His shirt was open at the neck; the
sleeves were rolled up, showing a pair of muscular brown arms. He was
clean–shaven, and his teeth were very white and regular. So much, in
detail, she noticed during that first half–second; then she turned her
attention to the puppies.</p><p>"What toppers!" she remarked. "What absolute toppers!"</p><p>She picked a fat, struggling mixture of legs and ecstatically slobbering
tongue out of the mêlée at her feet, and the Hermit watched her gravely.
It struck him that in the course of a fairly crowded life he had never
seen a more lovely picture than the one made by this tall slender girl
with the wriggling puppy in her arms. And another thing struck him also,
though he said nothing. Possibly it was accidental, but the puppy she
had picked up, and which was now making frantic endeavours to lick her
face, was out and away the best of the litter. Almost angrily he told
himself that it <span class="emphasis"><em>was</em></span> an accident, and yet he could not quite banish the
thought that it was an accident which would happen every time.
Thoroughbred picks thoroughbred; instinctively the girl would pick the
best. His mouth set a little, giving him a look of sternness, and at
that moment their eyes met over the puppy's head.</p><p>"Is he for sale?" asked the girl.</p><p>Undoubtedly he was for sale; Desmond Brooke, though he was in no need of
money, did not believe in running anything save on business lines. But
now something that he did not stop to analyse made him hesitate. He felt
a sudden inconsequent distaste against selling the puppy to her.</p><p>"You've picked the best, I see," he said quietly.</p><p>"Of course," she answered, with the faintest trace of hauteur.
Insensibly she felt that this man was hostile to her.</p><p>"I am afraid that that one is not for sale," he continued. "You can have
any of the others if you like."</p><p>Abruptly she restored the puppy to its mother.</p><p>"Having chosen the best, Mr. Brooke," she said, looking him straight in
the face, "I don't care about taking anything second–rate."</p><p>For a second or two they stared at one another. Ada Laverton had
wandered away and was talking shop to the gardener; the Hermit and Lady
Cynthia were alone.</p><p>"You surprise me," said the Hermit, calmly.</p><p>"That is gratuitously rude," answered the girl quietly. "It is also
extremely impertinent. And lastly it shows that you are a very bad judge
of character."</p><p>The man bowed.</p><p>"I sincerely hope that your 'lastly' is true. Am I to understand, then,
that you do not care to buy one of the other puppies?"</p><p>And suddenly the girl laughed half–angrily.</p><p>"What do you mean by daring to say such a thing to me? Why, you haven't
known me for more than two minutes."</p><p>"That is not strictly true, Lady Cynthia. Anyone who is capable of
reading and takes in the illustrated papers can claim your acquaintance
weekly."</p><p>"I see," she answered. "You disapprove of my poor features being
reproduced."</p><p>"Personally not at all," he replied. "I know enough of the world, and am
sufficiently broadminded, I trust, to realise how completely unimportant
the matter is. Lady Cynthia Stockdale at Ascot, at Goodwood, in her
motor–car, out of her motor–car, by the fire, by the gas stove, in her
boudoir, out of her boudoir, in the garden, not in the garden—and
always in a different frock every time. It doesn't matter to me, but
there are some people who haven't got enough money to pay for the
doctor's bill when their wives are dying. And it's such a comfort to
them to see you by the fire. To know that half the money you paid for
your frock would save the life of the woman they love."</p><p>"You're talking like a ranting tub–thumper," she cried, furiously. "How
dare you say such things to me? And, anyway, does breeding dogs in the
wilderness help them with their doctors' bills?"</p><p>"<span class="emphasis"><em>Touché</em></span>," said the man, with a faint smile. "Perhaps I haven't
expressed myself very clearly. You can't pay the bills, Lady Cynthia—I
can't. There are too many thousands to pay. But it's the bitter contrast
that hits them, and it's all so petty." For a while he paused, seeming
to seek for his words. "Come with me, Lady Cynthia, and I'll show you
something."</p><p>Almost violently he swung round on his heel and strode off towards the
house. For a moment she hesitated, then she followed him slowly. Anger
and indignation were seething in her mind; the monstrous impertinence of
this complete stranger was almost bewildering. She found him standing in
his smoking–room unlocking a drawer in a big writing–desk.</p><p>"Well," she said uncompromisingly from the doorway.</p><p>"I have something to show you," he remarked quietly. "But before I show
it to you, I want to tell you a very short story. Three years ago I was
in the back of beyond in Brazil. I'd got a bad dose of fever, and the
gassing I got in France wasn't helping matters. It was touch and go
whether I pulled through or not. And one day one of the fellows got a
two–month–old <span class="emphasis"><em>Tatler</em></span>. In that <span class="emphasis"><em>Tatler</em></span> was a picture—a picture of the
loveliest girl I have ever seen. I tore it out, and I propped it up at
the foot of my bed. I think I worshipped it; I certainly fell in love
with it. There is the picture."</p><p>He handed it to her, and she looked at it in silence. It was of herself,
and after a moment or two she raised her eyes to his.</p><p>"Go on," she said gently.</p><p>"A few months ago I came back to England. I found a seething cauldron of
discontent; men out of work—strikes—talk of revolution. And this was
the country for which a million of our best had died. I also found—week
after week—my picture girl displayed in every paper, as if no such
thing as trouble existed. She, in her motor–car, cared for none of these
things."</p><p>"That is unjust," said the girl, and her voice was low.</p><p>"I knew it was unjust," answered the man, "but I couldn't help it. And
if I couldn't help it—I who loved her—what of these others? It seemed
symbolical to me."</p><p>"Nero fiddling," said the girl, with a faint smile. "You're rather a
strange person, Mr. Brooke. Am I to understand that you're in love with
me?"</p><p>"You are not. I'm in love with the you of that picture."</p><p>"I see. You have set up an image. And supposing that image is a true
one."</p><p>"Need we discuss that?" said the man, with faint sarcasm.</p><p>The girl shrugged her shoulders.</p><p>"The supposition is at least as possible as that you are doing any vast
amount of good for the seething cauldron of discontent, I think you
called it, by breeding Aberdeens in the country. I'm afraid you're a
crank, Mr. Brooke, and not a very consistent one at that. And a crank is
to my mind synonymous with a bore."</p><p>The man replaced the picture in his desk.</p><p>"Then perhaps we had better join Mrs. Laverton," he remarked. "I
apologise for having wearied you."</p><p>In silence they went out into the garden, to find Ada Laverton wandering
aimlessly round looking for them.</p><p>"Where have you two been?" she demanded, as she saw them approaching.</p><p>"Mr. Brooke has been showing me a relic of his past," said Lady Cynthia.
"Most interesting and touching. Are you ready to go, Ada?"</p><p>Mrs. Laverton gave a quick glance at their two faces, and wondered what
had happened. Not much, surely, in so short a time—and yet with Cynthia
you never could tell. The Hermit's face, usually so inscrutable, showed
traces of suppressed feeling; Cynthia's was rather too expressionless.</p><p>"Are you coming to the ball to–morrow night, Hermit?" she asked.</p><p>"I didn't know there was one on, Mrs. Laverton," he answered.</p><p>"The cricket ball, my good man," she exclaimed. "It's been advertised
for the last month."</p><p>"But surely Mr. Brooke doesn't countenance anything so frivolous as
dancing?" remarked Lady Cynthia. "After the lecture he has just given me
on my personal deportment the idea is out of the question."</p><p>"Nevertheless I propose to come, Lady Cynthia," said Brooke quietly.
"You must forgive me if I have allowed my feelings to run away with me
to–day. And perhaps to–morrow you will allow me to find out if the new
image is correct—or a pose also."</p><p>"What do you mean?" asked the girl, puzzled.</p><p>"'Lady Cynthia Stockdale—possibly the best dancer in London,'" he
quoted mockingly; "I forget which of the many papers I saw it in."</p><p>"Do you propose to pass judgment on my dancing?" she asked.</p><p>"If you will be good enough to give me a dance."</p><p>For a moment words failed her. The cool, the sublime impertinence of
this man literally choked her. Then she nodded briefly.</p><p>"I'll give you a dance if you're there in time. And then you can test
for yourself, if you're capable of testing."</p><p>He bowed without a word, and stood watching them as they walked down the
lane.</p><p>"I think, Ada, that he's the most detestable man I've ever met,"
remarked Lady Cynthia furiously, as they turned into the main road.</p><p>And Ada Laverton said nothing, but wondered the more.</p><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>III</p></blockquote></div><p>She saw him as soon as she got into the ballroom. It was the last day
but one of the local cricket week, and the room was crowded. A large
number of the men she knew—men she had danced with in London who had
come down to play—and within half a minute she was surrounded. It was a
chance of getting a dance with her which was not to be missed; in London
she generally danced with one or at the most two men for the whole
evening—men who were absolutely perfect performers. For dancing was a
part of Lady Cynthia's life—and a big part.</p><p>The humour of the situation had struck her that day. For this
dog–breeding crank to presume to judge her powers of dancing seemed too
sublimely funny for annoyance. But he deserved to be taught a very
considerable lesson. And she proposed to teach him. After that she
proposed to dismiss him completely from her mind.</p><p>She gave him a cool nod as he came up, and frowned slightly as she
noticed the faint glint of laughter in his eyes. Really Mr. Desmond
Brooke was a little above himself. So much the worse for him.</p><p>"I don't know whether you'll find one or not," she remarked carelessly,
handing him her programme.</p><p>He glanced at it without a word, and quietly erased someone's name.</p><p>"I've made special arrangements with the band for Number 9, Lady
Cynthia," he remarked coolly. "A lot of people will be in at supper
then, so we ought to have the floor more to ourselves."</p><p>The next instant he had bowed and disappeared, leaving her staring
speechlessly at her programme.</p><p>"A breezy customer," murmured a man beside her. "Who is he?"</p><p>"A gentleman who is going to have the biggest lesson of his life," she
answered ominously, and the man laughed. He knew Lady Cynthia—and he
knew Lady Cynthia's temper when it was roused. But for once he was wrong
in his diagnosis; the outward and visible were there all right—the
inward and mental state of affairs in keeping with them was not. For the
first time in her life Lady Cynthia felt at a loss. Her partners found
her <span class="emphasis"><em>distraite</em></span> and silent; as a matter of fact she was barely conscious
of their existence. And the more she lashed at herself mentally, the
more confused did she get.</p><p>It was preposterous, impossible. Why should she cut Tubby Dawlish to
dance with a crank who kept dogs? A crank, moreover, who openly avowed
that his object was to see if she could dance. Every now and then she
saw him lounging by the door watching her. She knew he was watching her,
though she gave no sign of being aware of his existence. And all the
while Number 9 grew inexorably nearer.</p><p>Dance indeed! She would show him how she could dance. And as a result
she fell into the deadly fault of trying. No perfect dancer ever <span class="emphasis"><em>tries</em></span>
to dance; they just dance. And Lady Cynthia knew that better than most
people. Which made her fury rise still more against the man standing
just outside the door smoking a cigarette. A thousand times—no; she
would not cut Tubby.</p><p>And then she realised that people were moving in to supper; that the 8
was being taken down from the band platform—that 9 was being put up.
And she realised that Desmond Brooke the Hermit was crossing the room
towards her; was standing by her side while Tubby—like an outraged
terrier—was glaring at him across her.</p><p>"This is mine, old thing," spluttered Tubby. "Number 9."</p><p>"I think not," said the Hermit quietly. "I fixed Number 9 especially
with Lady Cynthia yesterday."</p><p>She hesitated—and was lost.</p><p>"I'm sorry, Tubby," she said a little weakly. "I forgot."</p><p>Not a trace of triumph showed on the Hermit's face, as he gravely
watched the indignant back of his rival retreating towards the door: not
a trace of expression showed on his face as he turned to the girl.</p><p>"You've been trying to–night, Lady Cynthia," he said gravely. "Please
don't—this time. It's a wonderful tune this—half waltz, half tango. It
was lucky finding Lopez conducting: he has played for me before. And I
want you just to forget everything except the smell of the passion
flowers coming in through the open windows, and the thrumming of the
guitars played by the natives under the palm–trees." His eyes were
looking into hers, and suddenly she drew a deep breath. Things had got
beyond her.</p><p>It was marked as a fox–trot on the programme, and several of the more
enthusiastic performers were waiting to get off on the stroke of time.
But as the first haunting notes of the dance wailed out—they paused and
hesitated. This was no fox–trot; this was—but what matter what it was?
For after the first bar no one moved in the room: they stood motionless
watching one couple—Lady Cynthia Stockdale and an unknown man.</p><p>"Why, it's the fellow who breeds dogs," muttered someone to his partner,
but there was no reply. She was too engrossed in watching.</p><p>And as for Lady Cynthia, from the moment she felt Desmond Brooke's arm
round her, the world had become merely movement—such movement as she
had never thought of before. To say that he was a perfect dancer would
be idle: he was dancing itself. And the band, playing as men possessed,
played for them and them only. Everything was forgotten: nothing in the
world mattered save that they should go on and on and on—dancing. She
was utterly unconscious of the crowd of onlookers: she didn't know that
people had left the supper–room and were thronging in at the door: she
knew nothing save that she had never danced before. Dimly she realised
at last that the music had stopped: dimly she heard a great roar of
applause—but only dimly. It seemed to come from far away—the shouts of
"Encore" seemed hazy and dream–like. They had left the ballroom, though
she was hardly conscious of where he was taking her, and when he turned
to her and said, "Get a wrap or something: I want to talk to you out in
God's fresh air," she obeyed him without a word. He was waiting for her
when she returned, standing motionless where she had left him. And still
in silence he led the way to his car which had been left apart from all
the others, almost as if he had expected to want it before the end. For
a moment she hesitated, for Lady Cynthia, though utterly unconventional,
was no fool.</p><p>"Will you come with me?" he said gravely.</p><p>"Where to?" she asked.</p><p>"Up to the cliffs beyond my house. It will take ten minutes—and I want
to talk to you with the sound of the sea below us."</p><p>"You had the car in readiness?" she said quietly.</p><p>"For both of us—or for me alone," he answered. "If you won't come, then
I go home. Will you come with me?" he repeated.</p><p>"Yes; I will come."</p><p>He helped her into the car and wrapped a rug round her; then he climbed
in beside her. And as they swung out of the little square, the strains
of the next dance followed them from the open windows of the Town Hall.</p><p>He drove as he danced—perfectly; and in the dim light the girl watched
his clear–cut profile as he stared ahead into the glare of the
headlights. Away to the right his farm flashed by, the last house before
they reached the top of the cliffs. And gradually, above the thrumming
of the engine, she heard the lazy boom of the big Atlantic swell on the
rocks ahead. At last he stopped where the road ran parallel to the top
of the cliff, and switched off the lights.</p><p>"Well," she said, a little mockingly, "is the new image correct or a
pose?"</p><p>"You dance divinely," he answered gravely. "More divinely than any woman
I have ever danced with, and I have danced with those who are reputed to
be the show dancers of the world. But I didn't ask you to come here to
talk about dancing; I asked you to come here in order that I might first
apologise, and then say Good–bye."</p><p>The girl gave a little start, but said nothing.</p><p>"I talked a good deal of rot to you yesterday," he went on, after a
moment. "You were justified in calling me a ranting tub–thumper. But I
was angry with myself, and when one is angry with oneself one does
foolish things. I know as well as you do just how little society
photographs mean: that was only a peg to hang my inexcusable tirade on.
You see, when one has fallen in love with an ideal—as I fell in love
with that picture of you, all in white in the garden at your father's
place—and you treasure that ideal for three years, it jolts one to find
that the ideal is different to what you thought. I fell in love with a
girl in white, and sometimes in the wilds I've seen visions and dreamed
dreams. And then I found her a lovely being in Paquin's most expensive
frocks; a social celebrity: a household name. And then I met her, and
knew my girl in white had gone. What matter that it was the inexorable
rule of Nature that she must go: what matter that she had changed into
an incredibly lovely woman? She had gone: my dream girl had vanished. In
her place stood Lady Cynthia Stockdale—the well–known society beauty.
Reality had come—and I was angry with you for having killed my
dream—angry with myself for having to wake up.</p><p>"Such is my apology," he continued gravely. "Perhaps you will
understand: I think you will understand. And just because I was angry
with you, I made you dance with me to–night. I said to myself: 'I will
show Lady Cynthia Stockdale that the man who loved the girl in white can
meet her successor on her own ground.' That's the idea I started with,
but things went wrong half–way through the dance. The anger died; in its
place there came something else. Even my love for the girl in white
seemed to become a bit hazy; I found that the successor had supplanted
her more completely than I realised. And since the successor has the
world at her feet—why, the breeder of dogs will efface himself, for his
own peace of mind. So, good–bye, Lady Cynthia—and the very best of
luck. If it won't bore you I may say that I'm not really a breeder of
dogs by profession. This is just an interlude; a bit of rest spent with
the most wonderful pals in the world. I'm getting back to harness soon:
voluntary harness, I'm glad to say, as the shekels don't matter. But
anything one can do towards greasing the wheels, and helping those
priceless fellows who gave everything without a murmur during the war,
and who are up against it now—is worth doing."</p><p>And still she said nothing, while he backed the car on to the grass
beside the road, and turned it the way they had come. A jumble of
strange thoughts were in her mind; a jumble out of which there stuck one
dominant thing—the brown tanned face of the man beside her. And when he
stopped the car by his own farm and left her without a word of apology,
she sat quite motionless staring at the white streak of road in front.
At last she heard his footsteps coming back along the drive, and
suddenly a warm wriggling bundle was placed in her lap—a bundle which
slobbered joyfully and then fell on the floor with an indignant yelp.</p><p>"The puppy," he said quietly. "Please take him." And very softly under
his breath he added: "The best to the best."</p><p>But she heard him, and even as she stooped to lift the puppy on to her
knees, her heart began to beat madly. She knew: at last, she knew.</p><p>"I'll take you back to the dance," he was saying, "and afterwards I'll
deposit that young rascal at Mrs. Laverton's house."</p><p>And then for the first time she spoke.</p><p>"Please go to Ada's house first. Afterwards we'll see about the dance."</p><p>He bowed and swung the car left–handed through the lodge gates.</p><p>"Will you wait for me?" she said, as he pulled up at the front door.</p><p>"As long as you like," he answered courteously.</p><p>"Because I may be some time," she continued a little unevenly. "And
don't wait for me here: wait for me where the drive runs through that
little copse, half–way down to the lodge."</p><p>The next instant she had disappeared into the house, with the puppy in
her arms. Why by the little copse? wondered the man as he slowly drove
the car down the drive. The butler had seen them already, so what did it
matter? He pulled up the car in the shadow of a big oak tree, and lit a
cigarette. Then, with his arms resting on the steering wheel, he sat
staring in front of him. He had done a mad thing, and she'd taken it
wonderfully well. He always had done mad things all his life; he was
made that way. But this was the maddest he had ever done. With a grim
smile he pictured her infuriated partners, waiting in serried rows by
the door, cursing him by all their gods. And then the smile faded, and
he sighed, while his knuckles gleamed white on the wheel. If only she
wasn't so gloriously pretty; if only she wasn't so utterly alive and
wonderful. Well—it was the penalty of playing with fire; and it had
been worth it. Yes; it had been worth it—even if the wound never quite
healed.</p><p>"<span class="emphasis"><em>A fool there was, and he made his prayer….</em></span>"</p><p>He pitched his cigarette away, and suddenly he stiffened and sat
motionless, while something seemed to rise in his throat and choke him,
and the blood hammered hotly at his temples. A girl in white was
standing not five feet from him on the fringe of the little wood: a girl
holding a puppy in her arms. And then he heard her speaking.</p><p>"It's not the same frock—but it's the nearest I can do."</p><p>She came up to the car, and once again over the head of the puppy their
eyes met.</p><p>"I've been looking," she said steadily, "for the real thing. I don't
<span class="emphasis"><em>think</em></span> I've found it—I <span class="emphasis"><em>know</em></span> I have."</p><p>"My dear!" he stammered hoarsely. "Oh! my dear dream girl."</p><p>"Take me back to the cliff, Desmond," she whispered. "Take me back to
our cliff."</p><p>And an outraged puppy, bouncing off the running–board on to a stray
fir–cone, viewed the proceedings of the next five minutes with silent
displeasure.</p></section><footer/></body></html>