<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>XI: A Glass of Whisky</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch10.xhtml" title="X: Lady Cynthia and the Hermit I"/><link rel="next" href="ch12.xhtml" title="XII: The Man Who Could Not Get Drunk"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="XI: A Glass of Whisky" epub:type="chapter" id="id900"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">XI: A Glass of Whisky</h1></div></div></div><p>"It's as easy as shelling peas to be a detective in fiction," grunted
the Barrister. "He's merely the author of the yarn disguised as a
character, and he knows the solution before he starts."</p><p>"But the reader doesn't, if the story is told well," objected the
Doctor. "And that's all that matters."</p><p>"Oh! I grant you that," said the Barrister, lighting a cigar. "I'm not
inveighing against the detective story—I love 'em. All I'm saying is
that in life a detective's job is a very different matter to—well, take
the illustrious example—to that of Sherlock Holmes. He's got to make
the crime fit to the clues, not the clues fit into the crime. It's not
so terribly difficult to reconstruct the murder of the Prime Minister
from a piece of charred paper discovered in the railway refreshment–room
at Bath—in fiction; it's altogether a different matter in reality."</p><p>The Soldier thoughtfully filled his pipe.</p><p>"And yet there have been many cases when the reconstruction has been
made on some clue almost equally 'flimsy,'" he murmured.</p><p>"A few," conceded the Barrister. "But nine out of ten are built up with
laborious care. The structure does not rest on any one fact—but on a
whole lot of apparently unimportant and trivial ones. Of course it's
more spectacular to bring a man to the gallows because half a brick was
found lying on the front door–step, but in practice it doesn't happen."</p><p>"It does—sometimes," remarked a quiet, sandy–haired man who was helping
himself to a whisky–and–soda. "It does sometimes, you man of law. Your
remarks coupled with my present occupation remind me of just such a
case."</p><p>"Your present occupation appears to be drinking whisky," said the
Doctor, curiously.</p><p>"Precisely," returned the other. "Almost as prosaic a thing as our legal
luminary's half–brick." He settled himself comfortably in a chair, and
the others leaned forward expectantly. "And yet on that very ordinary
pastime hinged an extremely interesting case: one in which I was lucky
enough to play a principal part."</p><p>"The night is yet young, old man," said the Barrister. "It's up to you
to prove your words, and duly confound me."</p><p>The sandy–haired man took a sip of his drink: then he put the glass on
the table beside him and began.</p><p>"Well, if it won't bore you, I'm agreeable. I'll tell you the whole
thing exactly as it took place, only altering the names of the people
involved. It happened before the war—in that hot summer of 1911, to be
exact. I'd been working pretty hard in London, and about the end of July
I got an invitation to go down and stop with some people in Devonshire.
I will call them the Marleys, and they lived just outside a small
village on the north coast. The family consisted of old Marley, who was
a man rising sixty, and his two daughters, Joan and Hilda. There was
also Jack Fairfax, through whom, as a matter of fact, I had first got to
know them.</p><p>"Jack was about my own age—thirty odd, and we'd been up at Cambridge
together. He was no relation to old Marley, but he was an orphan, and
Marley was his guardian, or had been when Jack was a youngster. And from
the very first Jack and the old man had not got on.</p><p>"Marley was not everybody's meat, by a long way—rather a
queer–tempered, secretive blighter; and Jack Fairfax had the devil of a
temper at times. When he was a boy he had no alternative except to do as
his guardian told him, but even in those early days, as I gathered
subsequently, there had been frequent storms. And when he came down from
Cambridge there were two or three most unholy rows which culminated in
Jack leaving the house for good.</p><p>"It was apparently this severance from the two girls, whom he had more
or less regarded as sisters, which caused the next bust–up. And this
one, according to Jack, was in the nature of a volcanic eruption. The
two girls had come up to London to go through the season with some aunt,
and Jack had seen a good deal of them with the net result that he and
Joan had fallen in love with each other. Then the fat was in the fire.
Jack straightway had gone down to Devonshire to ask old Marley's
consent: old Marley had replied in terms which, judging from Jack's
account of the interview, had contained a positive profusion of
un–Parliamentary epithets. Jack had lost his temper properly—and, well,
you know, the usual thing. At any rate, the long and the short of it was
that old Marley had recalled both his daughters from London, and had
sworn that if he ever saw Jack near the house again he'd pepper him with
a shot–gun. To which Jack had replied that only his grey hairs and his
gout saved Mr. Marley from the biggest hiding he'd ever had in his
life—even if not the biggest he deserved. With which genial exchange of
playful badinage I gathered the interview ended. And that was how
matters stood when I went down in July, 1911.</p><p>"For some peculiar reason the old man liked me, even though I was a
friend of Jack's. And in many ways I quite liked him, though there was
always something about him which defeated me. Of course, he had a foul
temper—but it wasn't altogether that. He seemed to me at times to be in
fear of something or somebody; and yet, though I say that now, I don't
know that I went as far as thinking so at the time. It was an almost
indefinable impression—vague and yet very real.</p><p>"The two girls were perfectly charming, though they were both a little
afraid of their father. How long it would have taken Joan to overcome
this timidity, and go to Jack without her father's consent, I don't
know. And incidentally, as our legislators say, the question did not
arise. Fate held the ace of trumps, and proceeded to deal it during my
visit."</p><p>The sandy–haired man leant back in his chair and crossed his legs
deliberately.</p><p>"I think it was about the fourth day after I arrived (he went on, after
a while) that the tragedy happened. We were sitting in the drawing–room
after dinner—a couple of men whose names I forget, and a girl friend of
Hilda's. Hilda herself was there, and Joan, who seemed very preoccupied,
had come in about a quarter of an hour previously. I had noticed that
Hilda had looked at her sister inquiringly as she entered, and that Joan
had shrugged her shoulders. But nothing had been said, and naturally I
asked no questions with the others there, though from the air of
suppressed excitement on Joan's face I knew there was something in the
wind.</p><p>"Old Marley himself was not with us: he was in his study at the other
end of the house. The fact was not at all unusual: he frequently retired
to his own den after dinner, sometimes joining the rest of the party for
a few minutes before going to bed, more often not appearing again till
the following morning. And so we all sat there talking idly, with the
windows wide open and the light shining out on to the lawn. It must have
been somewhere about ten to a quarter past when suddenly Hilda gave a
little scream.</p><p>"'What do you want?' she cried. 'Who are you?'</p><p>"I swung round in my chair, to find a man standing on the lawn outside,
in the centre of the light. He was facing us, and as we stared at him he
came nearer till he was almost in the room. And the first thing that
struck me was that he looked a little agitated.</p><p>"'You will excuse me appearing like this,' he said, 'but―' He broke
off and looked at me. 'Might I have a word with you alone, sir?'</p><p>"I glanced at the others: obviously he was a stranger. No trace of
recognition appeared on anyone's face, and I began to feel a little
suspicious.</p><p>"'What is it?' I cried. 'What can you possibly want to speak to me about
that you can't say now?'</p><p>"He shrugged his shoulders slightly. 'As you will,' he answered. 'My
idea was to avoid frightening the ladies. In the room at the other end
of the house a man has been murdered.'</p><p>"For a moment everyone was too thunderstruck to reply; then Hilda gave a
choking cry.</p><p>"'What sort of a man?' she said, breathlessly.</p><p>"'An elderly man of, I should think, about sixty,' returned the other,
gravely, and Hilda buried her face in her hands.</p><p>"'I will come with, you at once, sir,' I said, hurriedly, and the two
other men rose. Instinctively, I think, we all knew it must be old
Marley: there was no one else it could be. But the sudden shock of it
had dazed us all. I glanced at Joan. She was staring at the man like a
girl bereft of her senses, and I put my hand reassuringly on her
shoulder. And then she looked up at me, and the expression in her eyes
pulled me together. It was like a cold douche, and it acted
instantaneously. Because it wasn't horror or dazed stupefaction that I
read on her face: it was terror—agonised terror. And suddenly I
remembered her air of suppressed excitement earlier in the evening."</p><p>Once again the sandy–haired man paused while the others waited in
silence for him to continue.</p><p>"It was old Marley right enough (he went on quietly). We walked round
the front of the house until we came to the window of his study, and
there instinctively we paused. The window was open, and he was sitting
at his desk quite motionless. His head had fallen forward, and on his
face was a look of dreadful fear.</p><p>"For a while none of us moved. Then, with an effort, I threw my leg over
the window–sill and entered.</p><p>"'He's quite dead,' I said, and I felt my voice was shaking. 'We'd
better send for the police.'</p><p>"The others nodded, and in silence I picked up the telephone.</p><p>"'Mr. Marley's been killed,' I heard myself saying. 'Will you send
someone up at once?'</p><p>"And then for the first time I noticed the poker lying beside the chair,
and saw the back of the old man's head. It wasn't a pretty sight, and
one of the other men staying in the house—a youngster—turned very
white, and went to the window.</p><p>"'Pretty obvious how it was done,' said the stranger, quietly. 'Well,
gentlemen, nothing ought to be touched in this room until the police
arrive. I suggest that we should draw the curtains and go somewhere else
to wait for them.'</p><p>"I don't think any of us were sorry to fall in with his suggestion. I
also don't think I've ever drunk such a large whisky–and–soda as I did a
few minutes later. Discovering the body had been bad enough: breaking
the news to the two girls was going to be worse.</p><p>"It was Joan who met me in the hall—and we stared at one another in
silence. Then I nodded my head stupidly.</p><p>"'It's father,' she whispered. 'Oh, my God!'</p><p>"I put out my hand to steady her, and she was looking at me with a fixed
stare.</p><p>"'Don't you understand?' she muttered, hoarsely, and swallowing all the
time. 'Don't you understand? Jack has been here to–night.'</p><p>"'Jack!' I looked at her foolishly. 'Jack!'</p><p>"And then her full meaning struck me.</p><p>"'How did that man find out?' she whispered. 'And who is he?'</p><p>"'I don't know. I'll go and ask him.' I was still trying to adjust this
new development—and her next words seemed to come from a great
distance.</p><p>"'Do something. For God's sake—do something.'</p><p>"Then she turned and left me, and I watched her go up the stairs,
walking stiffly and clinging to the banisters.</p><p>"So Jack had been there! And old Marley was dead! Murdered! Hit on the
head with a poker. And Jack had been there. It's only in romantic
fiction that the reader is expected to assume the impossibility of the
hero committing a crime, owing to the extreme beauty of his nature. And
this wasn't romantic fiction. It was hard, brutal reality. The two facts
stood there, side by side, in all their dazzling simplicity. Jack's
nature was not supremely beautiful. He was an ordinary man, with the
devil of a temper when it was roused.</p><p>"Mechanically I started to walk back to the room where I had left the
other three men. They were sitting in silence when I entered, and after
a while the stranger got up.</p><p>"'A dreadful thing to happen,' he said, gravely.</p><p>"'May I ask, sir,' I began, 'how you came to discover it?'</p><p>"'Very simply,' he answered. 'I was strolling along the road, going back
to the village inn where I have been stopping for two or three nights,
when I saw the window of the room through the trees. The light was
shining out, and I could see someone sitting at the desk. More out of
idle curiosity than anything else, I paused for a moment or two, and
then something began to arouse my suspicions. The man at the desk seemed
so motionless. I thought perhaps he had fainted, or was ill, and after a
little hesitation I went in at the gate and looked through the window.
To my horror I saw he was dead—and I at once came round to the other
room from which the light was shining, and where I found you.'</p><p>"'There is a point which may have some bearing on the crime,' he
continued, after a pause. 'On my way up from the inn a man passed me. He
was coming from this direction, and seemed to me to be in a very excited
condition. It was his obvious agitation that made me notice him at the
time, though in the dim light I couldn't see his face very clearly. But
he was swinging his stick in the air, and muttering to himself. At the
moment I didn't think much about it. But now―' He shrugged his
shoulders slightly. 'Of course, I may be completely wrong, but I think
it is a thing worth mentioning to the police.'</p><p>"'Would you know the man again?' I asked, trying to speak quite
normally.</p><p>"'Well, he was tall—six feet at least—and broad. And he was
clean–shaven.' He spoke thoughtfully, weighing his words. 'I might know
him again—but I wouldn't swear to it. One has to be doubly careful if a
man's life is at stake.'</p><p>"I turned away abruptly. Jack was tall and broad and clean–shaven.
Strive as I would, the deadly suspicion was beginning to grip me that
Jack, in a fit of ungovernable passion, had killed the old man. And at
such moments, whatever may be the legal aspect of the matter, one's main
idea is how best to help a pal. If Jack had indeed done it, what was the
best thing to do?</p><p>"I rang the bell, and told the scared–looking maid to bring the whisky
and some glasses. Then, with a muttered apology, I left the room. I felt
I wanted to talk to Joan about it. I found her dry–eyed and quite
composed, though she was evidently holding herself under control with a
great effort. And briefly I told her what the stranger had said.</p><p>"She heard me out in silence: then she spoke with a quiet assurance that
surprised me.</p><p>"'If Jack did it,' she said, 'he doesn't know he's done it. He doesn't
know he's killed—father.' She faltered a bit over the last word, and I
didn't interrupt. 'What I mean is this,' she went on after a moment. 'I
know Jack—better than anyone else. I know those rages of his—when he
sees red. But they're over in a minute. He's capable of anything for a
second or two, but if he'd done it, Hugh, if he'd hit father—and killed
him—his remorse would have been dreadful. He wouldn't have run away:
I'm certain of that. That's why I say that if Jack did it he doesn't
know—he killed him.'</p><p>"I said nothing: there was no good telling her that it wasn't one blow,
nor yet two or three, that had been used. There was no good telling her
that it was no accidental thing done unwittingly in the heat of the
moment—that it was an absolute impossibility for the man who had done
it to be in ignorance of the fact. And yet, though I realised all that,
her simple conviction put new hope into me. Illogical, I admit, but I
went downstairs feeling more confident.</p><p>"I found that the local police had arrived—a sergeant and an ordinary
constable—and had already begun their investigations. The principal
evidence, of course, came from the stranger, and he repeated to them
what he had already told me. His name apparently was Lenham—Victor
Lenham—and the police knew he had been stopping at the local inn.</p><p>"'You saw the body through the window, sir,' said the sergeant, 'and
then went round to the drawing–room?'</p><p>"'That is so, sergeant.'</p><p>"'You didn't go into the room?'</p><p>"'Not until later—with these gentlemen. You see,' he added, 'I've seen
death too often not to recognise it. And as, in a way, you will
understand, it was no concern of mine, I thought it advisable to have
some member of the house itself with me before entering the room.'</p><p>"'Quite, sir, quite.' The sergeant nodded portentously. 'Is there
anything else you can tell us?'</p><p>"'Well,' said Lenham, 'there is a point, which I have already mentioned
to this gentleman.' He glanced at me, and then, turning back to the
sergeant, he told him about the man he had passed on the road. And it
was when he came to the description that suddenly the constable gave a
whistle of excitement. The sergeant frowned on him angrily, but the
worthy P.C., whose only experience of crime up–to–date had been
assisting inebriated villagers home, had quite lost his head.</p><p>"'Mr. Fairfax, sergeant,' he exploded. ''E was down here to–night.
Caught the last train, 'e did. Jenkins at the station told me—sure
thing.'</p><p>"'Good heavens, sergeant!' I said angrily, 'what the devil is the man
talking about? He surely doesn't suppose that Mr. Fairfax had anything
to do with it?'</p><p>"But the mischief was done. The sergeant formally told off his
indiscreet subordinate, but it was obvious that it was merely an
official rebuke. In a village like that everybody knows everybody else's
private affairs, and the strained relations between the dead man and
Jack Fairfax were common property. I could see at a glance that the
sergeant regarded the matter as solved already.</p><p>"'Would you recognise this man again, sir?' he demanded, and Lenham gave
him the same guarded reply as he had already given to me. He might—but
he wouldn't swear to it. It was impossible to be too careful in such a
case, he repeated, and it was practically dark when he had passed the
man.</p><p>"It was all duly noted down, and then we adjourned to the room of the
tragedy. The constable—a ruddy–faced young man—turned pale when he saw
the body; then he pulled himself together and assisted the sergeant in
his formal examination. I didn't blame him—we were all feeling the
strain, somewhat naturally. Lenham seemed the least concerned, but it
wasn't a personal matter with him as it was with us, especially with me.
All the time I was fidgeting round the room, subconsciously watching the
stolid sergeant making notes, but with only one thought dominating my
brain—how best to help Jack. Not that I had definitely made up my mind
that he'd done it, but even at that stage of the proceedings I realised
that appearances were against him. And Joan's words were ringing in my
head—'For God's sake—do something.'</p><p>"After a while I crossed the room to a small table on which a tantalus
of whisky and two glasses were standing. I looked at the tray with
unseeing eyes—an Indian silver one, which old Marley had been very
proud of. And then mechanically I picked up the glasses. I don't know
why I did so; the action was, as I say, mechanical. They had been
used—both of them: they had been used for whisky—one could tell that
by the smell. And when I put the glasses down again on the tray, the
sergeant was approaching with his note–book."</p><p>The sandy–haired man paused, with a reminiscent smile.</p><p>"Ever noticed how extraordinarily dense you can be at times, even with a
plain fact staring you straight in the face? There was one staring at me
for ten minutes that night before my grey matter began to stir."</p><p>"Just hold on a minute," interrupted the Barrister. "Is this plain fact
staring us in the face now?"</p><p>"No, it isn't," conceded the narrator. "At the moment you are in the
position of the other people in that room. Mind you, I've left out
nothing in order to mystify you; the story, as I have given it to you,
is a plain unvarnished account of what took place. But I'm out to
disprove your half–brick theory, lawyer–man, and to do so with such
little story–telling ability as I happen to possess.</p><p>"Now, I won't weary you with what happened during the next week, beyond
saying that an inquest and a burglary took place. And the latter, at any
rate, was very successful. The former moved along obvious lines, and
resulted in Jack Fairfax being arrested for the wilful murder of his
guardian, Roger Marley. The evidence was purely circumstantial, but it
was about as damning as it could be. Jack admitted to having had an
interview with Marley that night; he admitted that they had had an
appalling quarrel. What was even worse was that he admitted to having
struck the old man in a furious fit of rage, but beyond that he denied
everything. He absolutely swore that the blow he struck Marley could not
have killed him; further, that he had never handled the poker. And then,
a finger–print expert proved that he had. That was the worst shock of
the lot, and his explanation given afterwards that, now he came to think
of it, he had picked up the poker to ram the tobacco down in his pipe
convinced no one. He indignantly denied that his action in going up to
London by the last train was in any sense running away; he had intended
all along to go up by that train. And his reason for leaving the house
after the interview without attempting to see his <span class="emphasis"><em>fiancée</em></span> was that he
was in such a rage with her father that he couldn't trust himself to
speak to her for fear of what he might say.</p><p>"So much for Jack Fairfax's case—pretty black, as you will agree. In
fact, I don't think I should be exaggerating if I said that there were
only two people in England convinced of his innocence. And he was one of
them. Even Joan's faith was shaken, a little.</p><p>"It was on the tenth day after the inquest that I rang up the inspector
who had come over from Exeter to look into the case, with a request that
he would come up to the house. I told him that I had certain information
which might interest him and suggested that he might care to hear it. I
also rang up Lenham at the inn, and asked him if he would mind coming
along at the same time. I told him I'd discovered the burglar. By the
way, I didn't tell you that it was his room that had been burgled.</p><p>"In about half an hour they arrived, and the local sergeant as well.</p><p>"'What's this about my burglar?' laughed Lenham. 'A funny
fellow—because as far as I can see he didn't take anything.'</p><p>"'All in good time,' I answered, smiling. 'I've found out a lot of
strange things in town.'</p><p>"Lenham looked at me quickly. 'Oh! have you been to London?' he
inquired.</p><p>"'Yes,' I answered, 'for two days. Most entertaining.'</p><p>"And then the inspector chipped in, impatiently:</p><p>"'Well, sir, what is it you want to say to me?' He looked at his watch
suggestively.</p><p>"'First of all, inspector,' I said, quietly, 'I want to ask you a
question. Have you ever heard the legal maxim, <span class="emphasis"><em>Falsus in uno, falsus in
omne</em></span>?'</p><p>"I could see that he hadn't the faintest idea what I was driving at. I
could also see that Lenham's eyes had suddenly become strained.</p><p>"'It means,' I went on, 'that if a witness—let us say—is proved to
have told one lie, there is strong presumptive evidence that he has told
several. At any rate, the value of his statement is greatly diminished.
Do you agree?'</p><p>"'Certainly,' he answered. 'But I don't see―'</p><p>"'You will shortly, inspector,' I remarked. 'Now who would you consider
the principal witness against Mr. Fairfax?'</p><p>"'Mr. Fairfax himself,' said the inspector, promptly.</p><p>"'And leaving him out?' I asked.</p><p>"'Well—I suppose—this gentleman here.' He nodded towards Lenham, who
was sitting quite motionless, watching me.</p><p>"'Precisely,' I murmured. 'Then why was it necessary for Mr. Lenham to
state that his name was Lenham, and further to swear that he had never
seen Mr. Marley before—when both those statements were lies?'</p><p>"'What the devil do you mean?' snarled Lenham, rising from his chair.
'What do you mean by saying my name is not Lenham?'</p><p>"'You wanted to know about the burglar who took nothing, didn't you?' I
said, grimly. 'Well—I was the burglar, and I took something very
valuable—an address.'</p><p>"'What on earth―' began the inspector, and then he glanced at Lenham.
'I think you'd better sit still, Mr. Lenham,' he said, quietly, 'until
we have heard what this gentleman has to say.'</p><p>"Lenham sat back in his chair with a venomous look at me. Then he
laughed harshly.</p><p>"'By all means, inspector,' he remarked. 'Only it is a little
disconcerting to be cross–examined suddenly by a man who admits he is a
thief.'</p><p>"As a matter of fact the man didn't know how much I knew—or how little;
and between ourselves it was deuced little. But, watching him closely, I
knew I was right, and my only hope was to bluff him into some admission.</p><p>"'Shall we endeavour to reconstruct the events of the night when Mr.
Marley was murdered, Mr. Lenardi?' I began, quietly. 'That is your name,
is it not?—and you are a Corsican.'</p><p>"'Well,' he said, 'what if I am? I had a very good reason for changing
my name.'</p><p>"'Doubtless,' I agreed. 'Let us hope your reason will prove satisfactory
to the inspector. May I suggest, however, unless you can supply a better
one, that your reason was to avoid the notoriety which would inevitably
arise if a foreigner came to stay in a small village like this? And you
were particularly anxious to avoid any possibility of Mr. Marley knowing
that a Corsican was in the neighbourhood.'</p><p>"He laughed sarcastically. 'I think that I have already stated that I
have never even seen Mr. Marley,' he sneered.</p><p>"'Oh!' I remarked. 'Then might I ask you, inspector, to have a look at
this photograph? It is old and faded, but the faces are still clear.'</p><p>"I handed the photograph to the inspector, and with a sudden curse the
Corsican whipped out a knife and sprang at me. He realised even then
that the game was up, and his one thought was to revenge himself on me.
But I'd been expecting some such move, and I'd got a revolver handy.
Incidentally, revolver shooting is one of the few things I can do, and I
plugged him through the forearm before he could do any damage.</p><p>"He stood there glaring at me sullenly, and then the inspector took a
hand.</p><p>"'Stand by that window, sergeant. Now, Mr. whatever–your–name–is, no
monkey tricks. Do you still deny that you knew Mr. Marley?"</p><p>"'I refuse to answer,' snarled the man.</p><p>"'Because this photograph is of you and Marley and a woman. Taken abroad
somewhere.'</p><p>"'Naples, to be exact, inspector,' I said. 'I found it in his rooms in
Berners Street, the address of which I got as the result of my burglary
here.'</p><p>"The Corsican stood there like a beast at bay, and the inspector's face
was stern.</p><p>"'What explanation have you got to give?' he rapped out. 'Why did you
lie in evidence?'</p><p>"'I refuse to answer,' repeated the man.</p><p>"'Since he is so uncommunicative,' I remarked, 'perhaps you will allow
me to reconstruct the crime. Much of it, of necessity, is guess–work.
For instance, Lenardi, what was your motive in murdering Mr. Marley?' I
rapped the question out at him, and though he'd have killed me willingly
if he could have got at me he didn't deny it.</p><p>"'Well,' I continued, 'it doesn't matter. Let us assume it was the girl
in that photograph. You tracked Marley to earth here—in this
village—that is all that concerns us. And having tracked him, you bided
your time. Vengeance is the sweeter for delay. Each evening you walked
up here, watching him through the window—gloating over what was to
come. And then one night you found another man with him—Jack
Fairfax—and they were quarrelling. At once you saw that this was your
opportunity. However skilfully you hid your traces under ordinary
circumstances, there was always a grave risk; but here, ready to hand,
was a marvellous stroke of luck. Perhaps you crept nearer the window in
the darkness, secure in the fact that the room was in a remote part of
the house. You saw Jack Fairfax leave, blind with rage, and then,
skulking out of the night, you entered the room yourself.'</p><p>"'It's a lie!' shouted the Corsican, but his lips were white.</p><p>"'And then old Marley saw you, and the rage on his face was replaced by
a dreadful terror. He knew what you had come for. I don't think you
wasted much time, Lenardi. You picked up the poker with a gloved
hand—oh! you were taking no chances—and you battered his head in. And
then, Lenardi—and then you drank a whisky–and–soda. You drank a
whisky–and–soda, and then you decided on a very bold move: you came and
alarmed the rest of the house. It was clever of you, but―'"</p><p>The sandy–haired man smiled thoughtfully.</p><p>"We sprang forward together—the inspector and I; but we were too late.
The Corsican had swallowed poison before we could stop him. He was dead
in half a minute and he never spoke again. So I can only assume that my
imagination was not far off the rails."</p><p>"Yes, but hang it, man," said the Barrister, peevishly, "the whole thing
was a pure fluke on your part."</p><p>"I've never laid any claim to being a detective," murmured the
sandy–haired man, mildly, rising and helping himself to some more
whisky. "All that I said was that there are times when you can build an
entire case from your half–brick or its equivalent. And when you find
two glasses both smelling strongly of whisky in a room, you assume that
two people have drunk whisky. Which was where the Corsican tripped up.
You see, he distinctly swore he hadn't entered the room till he came in
with us."</p><p>The Barrister raised protesting hands to the ceiling.</p><p>"The man is indubitably mad," he remarked to no one in particular. "Was
not Fairfax in the room most of the evening?"</p><p>The sandy–haired man looked even more mild.</p><p>"I think that perhaps I ought to have mentioned one fact sooner, but I
was afraid it would spoil the story. The cat has an aversion to water;
the fish have an aversion to dry land. But both these aversions pale
into total insignificance when compared to Jack Fairfax's aversion to
whisky."</p><p>He gazed thoughtfully at his glass.</p><p>"A strange flaw in an otherwise fine character. Thank heavens the
symptom is not common!"</p></section><footer/></body></html>