<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>XII: The Man Who Could Not Get Drunk</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch11.xhtml" title="XI: A Glass of Whisky"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="XII: The Man Who Could Not Get Drunk" epub:type="chapter" id="id920"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">XII: The Man Who Could Not Get Drunk</h1></div></div></div><p>"Yes; she's a beautiful woman. There's no doubt about that. What did you
say her name was?"</p><p>"I haven't mentioned her name," I returned. "But there's no secret about
it. She is Lady Sylvia Clavering."</p><p>"Ah! Sylvia. Of course, I remember now."</p><p>He drained his glass of brandy and sat back in his chair, while his eyes
followed one of the most beautiful women in London as she threaded her
way through the tables towards the entrance of the restaurant. An
obsequious head–waiter bent almost double as she passed; her exit, as
usual, befitted one of the most be–photographed women of Society. And it
was not until the doors had swung to behind her and her escort that the
man I had been dining with spoke again.</p><p>"I guess that little bow she gave as she passed here was yours, not
mine," he said, with the suspicion of a smile.</p><p>"Presumably," I answered a little curtly. "Unless you happen to know
her. I have that privilege."</p><p>His smile grew a trifle more pronounced though his eyes were set and
steady. "Know her?" He beckoned to the waiter for more brandy. "No, I
can't say I know her. In fact, my sole claim to acquaintanceship is that
I carried her for three miles in the dark one night, slung over my
shoulder like a sack of potatoes. But I don't know her."</p><p>"You did what?" I cried, staring at him in amazement.</p><p>"Sounds a bit over the odds, I admit." He was carefully cutting the end
off his cigar. "Nevertheless it stands."</p><p>Now when any man states that he has carried a woman for three miles,
whether it be in the dark or not, and has followed up such an
introduction so indifferently that the woman fails even to recognise him
afterwards, there would seem to be the promise of a story. But when the
woman is one of the Lady Sylvia Claverings of this world, and the man is
of the type of my dinner companion, the promise resolves itself into a
certainty.</p><p>Merton was one of those indefinable characters who defy placing. You
felt that if you landed in Yokohama, and he was with you, you would
instinctively rely on him for information as to the best thing to do and
the best way to do it. There seemed to be no part of the globe, from the
South Sea Islands going westward to Alaska, with which he was not as
well acquainted as the ordinary man is with his native village. At the
time I did not know him well. The dinner was only our third meeting, and
during the meal we confined ourselves to the business which had been the
original cause of our running across one another at all. But even in
that short time I had realised that Billy Merton was a white man. And
not only was he straight, but he was essentially a useful person to have
at one's side in a tight corner.</p><p>"Are you disposed to elaborate your somewhat amazing statement?" I
asked, after a pause.</p><p>For a moment or two he hesitated, and his eyes became thoughtful.</p><p>"I don't suppose there's any reason why I shouldn't," he answered
slowly. "It's ancient history now—ten years or so."</p><p>"That was just about the time she was married," I remarked.</p><p>He nodded. "She was on her honeymoon when it happened. Well, if you want
to hear the yarn, come round to my club."</p><p>"Why, certainly," I said, beckoning for the bill. "Let's get on at once;
I'm curious."</p><p>"Do you know Africa at all?" he asked me, as we pulled our chairs up to
the fire. We had the room almost to ourselves; a gentle snoring from the
other fireplace betokened the only other occupant.</p><p>"Egypt," I answered. "Parts of South Africa. The usual thing: nothing
out of the ordinary."</p><p>He nodded. "It was up the West Coast that it happened," he began, after
his pipe was going to his satisfaction. "And though I've been in many
God–forsaken spots in my life, I've never yet struck anything to compare
with that place. Nwambi it was called—just a few shacks stretching in
from the sea along a straggling, dusty street—one so–called shop and a
bar. It called itself an hotel, but Lord help the person who tried to
put up there. It was a bar pure and simple, though no one could call the
liquor that. Lukewarm gin, some vile substitute for whisky, the usual
short drinks, and some local poisons formed the stock; I ought to
know—I was the bartender.</p><p>"For about three miles inland there stretched a belt of stinking
swamp—one vast malaria hot–bed—and over this belt the straggling
street meandered towards the low foot–hills beyond. At times it almost
lost itself: but if you didn't give up hope, or expire from the stench,
and cast about you'd generally find it again leading you on to where you
felt you might get a breath of God's fresh air in the hills. As a matter
of fact you didn't; the utmost one can say is that it wasn't quite so
appalling as in the swamp itself. Mosquitoes! Heavens! they had to be
seen to be believed. I've watched 'em there literally like a grey
cloud."</p><p>Merton smiled reminiscently.</p><p>"That—and the eternal boom of the sea on the bar half a mile out, made
up Nwambi. How any white man ever got through alive if he had to stop
there any length of time is beyond me; to be accurate, very few did. It
was a grave, that place, and only the down–and–outers went there. At the
time I was one myself.</p><p>"The sole reason for its existence at all was that the water alongside
the quay was deep enough for good–sized boats to come in, and most of
the native produce from the district inland found its way down to Nwambi
for shipment. Once over the belt of swamp and a few miles into the hills
the climate was much better, and half a dozen traders in a biggish way
had bungalows there. They were Dagos most of them—it wasn't a British
part of the West Coast—and I frankly admit that my love for the Dago
has never been very great. But there was one Scotchman, McAndrew,
amongst them—and he was the first fellow who came into the bar after
I'd taken over the job. He was down for the night about some question of
freight.</p><p>"'You're new,' he remarked, leaning against the counter. 'What's
happened to the other fellow? Is he dead?'</p><p>"'Probably,' I returned. 'What do you want?'</p><p>"'Gin—double tot. What's your name?'</p><p>"I told him, and he pondered the matter while he finished his drink.</p><p>"'Well,' he said at length, 'I warned your predecessor, and I'll warn
you. Don't fall foul of my manager down here. Name of Mainwaring—I do
<span class="emphasis"><em>not</em></span> think. Don't give him advice about keeping off the drink, or he'll
kill you. He's killing himself, but that's his business. I'm tough—you
look tough, but he's got us beat to a frazzle. And take cover if he ever
gets mixed up with any of the Dagos—the place isn't healthy.'</p><p>"It was just at that moment that the door swung open and a tall, lean
fellow lounged in. He'd got an eyeglass screwed into one eye, and a pair
of perfectly–fitting polo boots with some immaculate white breeches
encased his legs. His shirt was silk, his sun–helmet spotless; in fact,
he looked like the typical English dude of fiction.</p><p>"'My manager, Mainwaring,' said McAndrew, by way of introduction.</p><p>"Mainwaring stared at me for a moment or two—then he shrugged his
shoulders.</p><p>"'You look sane; however, if you come here you can't be. Double gin—and
one for yourself.'</p><p>"He spoke with a faint, almost affected drawl, and as I poured out the
drinks I watched him covertly. When he first came in I had thought him a
young man; now I wasn't so sure. It was his eyes that made one wonder as
to his age—they were so utterly tired. If he was indeed drinking
himself to death, there were no traces of it as yet on his face, and his
hand as he lifted his glass was perfectly steady. But those eyes of
his—I can see them now. The cynical bitterness, the concentrated
weariness of all Hell was in them. And it's not good for any man to look
like that; certainly not a man of thirty–five, as I afterwards
discovered his age to be."</p><p>Merton paused and sipped his whisky–and–soda, while from the other side
of the room came indications that the sleeper still slept.</p><p>"I never found out what his real name was," he continued, thoughtfully.
"Incidentally, it doesn't much matter. We knew him as Mainwaring, and
the J. which preceded it in his signature was assumed to stand for James
or Jimmy. Anyway, he answered to it, which was the main point. As far as
I know, he never received a letter and he never read a paper, and I
guess I got to know him better than anyone else in that hole. Every
morning, punctual to the second at eleven o'clock, he'd stroll into the
bar and have three double–gins. Sometimes he'd talk in his faint, rather
pleasant drawl; more often he'd sit silently at one of the rickety
tables, staring out to sea, with his long legs stretched out in front of
him. But whichever he did—whatever morning it was—you could always see
your face in his boots.</p><p>"I remember once, after I'd been there about a month, I started to pull
his leg about those boots of his.</p><p>"'Take the devil of a long time cleaning them in the morning, don't you,
Jimmy?' I said, as he lounged up to the bar for his third gin.</p><p>"'Yes,' he answered, leaning over the counter so that his face was close
to mine. 'Got anything further to say about my appearance?'</p><p>"'Jimmy,' I replied, 'your appearance doesn't signify one continental
damn to me. But as the only two regular British <span class="emphasis"><em>habitués</em></span> of this
first–class American bar, don't let's quarrel.'</p><p>"He grinned—a sort of slow, lazy grin.</p><p>"'Think not?' he said. 'Might amuse one. However, perhaps you're right.'</p><p>"And so it went on—one sweltering day after another, until one could
have gone mad with the hideous boredom of it. I used to stand behind the
bar there sometimes and curse weakly and foolishly like a child, but I
never heard Mainwaring do it. What happened during those steamy nights
in the privacy of his own room, when he—like the rest of us—was
fighting for sleep, is another matter. During the day he never varied.
Cold, cynical, immaculate, he seemed a being apart—above our little
worries and utterly contemptuous of them. Maybe he was right—maybe the
thing that had downed him was too big for foolish cursing. Knowing what
I do now, a good many things are clear which one didn't realise at the
time.</p><p>"Only once, I think, did I ever get in the slightest degree intimate
with him. It was latish one evening, and the bar was empty save for us
two. I'd been railing against the fate that had landed me penniless in
such an accursed spot, and after a while he chipped in, in his lazy
drawl:</p><p>"'Would a thousand be any good to you?'</p><p>"I looked at him speechless. 'A thousand pounds?' I stammered.</p><p>"'Yes; I think I can raise that for you.' He was staring in front of him
as he spoke. 'And yet I don't know. I've got more or less used to you
and you'll have to stop a bit longer. Then we'll see about it.'</p><p>"'But, good heavens! man,' I almost shouted, 'do you mean to say that
you stop here when you can lay your hand on a thousand pounds?'</p><p>"'It appears so, doesn't it?' He rose and stalked over to the bar. 'It
doesn't much matter where you stop, Merton, when you can't be in the one
place where you'd sell your hopes of Heaven to be. And it's best,
perhaps, to choose a place where the end will come quickly.'</p><p>"With that he turned on his heel, and I watched him with a sort of dazed
amazement as he sauntered down the dusty road, white in the tropical
moon, towards his own shack. A thousand pounds! The thought of it rang
in my head all through the night. A thousand pounds! A fortune! And
because, out in death–spots like that, men are apt to think strange
thoughts—thoughts that look ugly by the light of day—I found myself
wondering how long he could last at the rate he was going.
Two—sometimes three—bottles of gin a day: it couldn't be long. And
then—who knew? It would be quick, the break–up; all the quicker because
there was not a trace of it now. And perhaps when it came he'd remember
about that thousand. Or I could remind him."</p><p>Merton laughed grimly.</p><p>"Yes, we're pretty average swine, even the best of us, when we're up
against it, and I lay no claims to be a plaster saint. But Fate had
decreed that Jimmy Mainwaring was to find the end which he craved for
quicker than he had anticipated. Moreover—and that's what I've always
been glad about—it had decreed that he was to find it before drink had
rotted that iron constitution of his; while his boots still shone and
his silk shirts remained spotless. It had decreed that he was to find it
in the way of all others that he would have chosen, had such a wild
improbability ever suggested itself. Which is going ahead a bit fast
with the yarn—but no matter.</p><p>"It was after I'd been there about three months that the incident
happened which was destined to be the indirect cause of his death. I
told you, didn't I, that there were several Dago traders who lived up in
the foot–hills, and on the night in question three of them had come down
to Nwambi on business of some sort—amongst them one Pedro Salvas, who
was as unpleasant a specimen of humanity as I have ever met. A crafty,
orange–skinned brute, who indulged, according to common knowledge, in
every known form of vice, and a good many unknown ones too. The three of
them were sitting at a table near the door when Mainwaring lounged
in—and McAndrew's words came back to me. The Dagos had been drinking;
Jimmy looked in his most uncompromising mood. He paused at the door, and
stared at each of them in turn through his eyeglass; then he turned his
back on them and came over to me.</p><p>"I glanced over his shoulder at the three men, and realised there was
trouble coming. They'd been whispering and muttering together the whole
evening, though at the time I had paid no attention. But now Pedro
Salvas, with an ugly flush on his ugly face, had risen and was coming
towards the bar.</p><p>"'If one so utterly unworthy as I,' he snarled, 'may venture to speak to
the so very exclusive Englishman, I would suggest that he does not throw
pictures of his lady–loves about the streets.'</p><p>"He was holding something in his hand, and Jimmy swung round like a
panther. His hand went to his breast pocket; then I saw what the Dago
was holding out. It was the miniature of a girl. And after that I didn't
see much more; I didn't even have time to take cover. It seemed to me
that the lightning movement of Jimmy's left hand as he grabbed the
miniature, and the terrific upper–cut with his right, were simultaneous.
Anyway, the next second he was putting the picture back in his breast
pocket, and the Dago, snarling like a mad dog, was picking himself out
of a medley of broken bottles. That was phase one. Phase two was equally
rapid, and left me blinking. There was the crack of a revolver, and at
the same moment a knife stuck out quivering in the wall behind my head.
Then there was a silence, and I collected my scattered wits.</p><p>"The revolver, still smoking, was in Jimmy's hand: Salvas, his right arm
dripping with blood, was standing by the door, while his two pals were
crouching behind the table, looking for all the world like wild beasts
waiting to spring.</p><p>"'Next time,' said Jimmy, 'I shoot to kill.'</p><p>"And he meant it. He was a bit white round the nostrils, which is a
darned dangerous sign in a man, especially if he's got a gun and you're
looking down the business end of it. And no one knew it better than
those three Dagos. They went on snarling, but not one of them moved an
eyelid.</p><p>"'Put your knives on that table, you scum,' ordered Jimmy.</p><p>"The other two obeyed, and he laughed contemptuously.</p><p>"'Now clear out. You pollute the air.'</p><p>"For a moment or two they hesitated: then Salvas, with a prodigious
effort, regained his self–control.</p><p>"'You are brave, Señor Mainwaring, when you have a revolver and we are
unarmed,' he said, with a sneer.</p><p>"In two strides Jimmy was at the table where the knives were lying. He
picked one up, threw me his gun, and pointed to the other knife.</p><p>"'I'll fight you now, Salvas,' he answered, quietly. 'Knife to knife,
and to a finish.'</p><p>"But the Dago wasn't taking any, and 'pon my soul I hardly blamed him.
For if ever a man was mad, Jimmy Mainwaring was mad that night: mad with
the madness that knows no fear and is absolutely blind to consequences.</p><p>"'I do not brawl in bars with drunken Englishmen,' remarked Salvas,
turning on his heel.</p><p>"A magnificent utterance, but ill–advised with Jimmy as he was. He gave
a short laugh and took a running kick, and Don Pedro Salvas disappeared
abruptly into the night. And the other two followed with celerity.</p><p>"'You'll be getting into trouble, old man,' I said, as he came back to
the bar, 'if you start that sort of game with the Dagos.'</p><p>"'The bigger the trouble the more I'll like it,' he answered, shortly.
'Give me another drink. Don't you understand yet, Merton, that I'm
beyond caring?'</p><p>"And thinking it over since, I've come to the conclusion that he spoke
the literal truth. It's a phrase often used, and very rarely meant; in
his case it was the plain, unvarnished truth. Rightly or wrongly he had
got into such a condition that he cared not one fig whether he lived or
died; if anything he preferred the latter. And falling foul of the Dago
colony was a better way than most of obtaining his preference.</p><p>"Of course, the episode that night had shown me one thing: it was a
woman who was at the bottom of it all. I didn't ask any questions; he
wasn't a man who took kindly to cross–examination. But I realised pretty
forcibly that if the mere handling of her picture by a Dago had produced
such a result, the matter must be serious. Who she was I hadn't any
idea, or what was the trouble between them—and, as I say, I didn't ask.</p><p>"And then one day a few weeks later I got the answer to the first
question. Someone left a month–old <span class="emphasis"><em>Tatler</em></span> in the bar, and I was
glancing through it when Mainwaring came in. I reached up for the gin
bottle to give him his usual drink, and when I turned round to hand it
to him he was staring at one of the pictures with the look of a dead man
on his face. I can see him now with his knuckles gleaming white through
the sunburn of his hands, and his great powerful chest showing under his
shirt. He stood like that maybe for five minutes—motionless; then,
without a word, he swung round and left the bar. And I picked up the
paper."</p><p>Merton paused and drained his glass.</p><p>"Lady Sylvia's wedding?" I asked, unnecessarily, and he nodded.</p><p>"So the first part of the riddle was solved," he continued, quietly.
"And when two days passed by without a sign of Mainwaring, I began to be
afraid that he had solved his own riddle in his own way. But he hadn't;
he came into the bar at ten o'clock at night, and leaned up against the
counter in his usual way.</p><p>"'What have you been doing with yourself?' I said, lightly.</p><p>"'I've been trying to get drunk,' he answered slowly, letting one of his
hands fall on my arm with a grip like steel. 'And, dear God! I can't.'</p><p>"It doesn't sound much—told like this in the smoking–room of a London
club. But though I've seen and heard many things in my life that have
impressed me—horrible, dreadful things that I shall never forget—the
moment of all others that is most indelibly stamped on my brain is that
moment when, leaning across the bar, I looked into the depths of the
soul of the man who called himself Jimmy Mainwaring—the man who could
not get drunk."</p><p>Once again he paused, and this time I did not interrupt him. He was back
in that steaming night, with the smell of stale spirits in his nostrils
and the sight of strange things in his eyes. And I felt that I, too,
could visualise that tall, immaculate Englishman leaning against the
counter—the man who was beyond caring.</p><p>"But I must get on with it," continued Merton, after a while. "The club
will be filling up soon and I've only got the finish to tell you now.
And by one of those extraordinary coincidences which happen far more
frequently in life than people will allow, the finish proved a worthy
one.</p><p>"It was about two days later. I was in the bar polishing the glasses
when the door swung open and two men came in. They were obviously
English, and both of them were dressed as if they were going to a
garden–party.</p><p>"'Thank heavens! Tommy, here's a bar, at any rate,' said one of them. 'I
say, barman, what have you got?'</p><p>"Well, I had a bit of a liver, and I disliked being called barman.</p><p>"'Several bottles of poison,' I answered, 'and the hell of a temper.'</p><p>"The second one laughed, and after a moment or two the other joined in.</p><p>"'I don't wonder at the latter commodity,' he said. 'This is a ghastly
hole.'</p><p>"'I wouldn't deny it,' I answered. 'What, if I may ask, has brought you
here?'</p><p>"'Oh, we've had a small breakdown, and the skipper came in here to
repair it. We've just come ashore to have a look round.'</p><p>"I glanced through the window, and noticed for the first time that a
steam yacht was lying off the shore. She was a real beauty—looked about
a thousand tons—and I gave a sigh of envy.</p><p>"'You're not in want of a barman, by any chance, are you?' I said. 'If
so, I'll swim out and chance the sharks.'</p><p>"''Fraid we've got everything in that line,' he answered. 'But select
the least deadly of your poisons, and join us.'</p><p>"And it was as I was pulling down the gin and vermouth that Jimmy
Mainwaring came into the bar. He got about half–way across the floor,
and then he stopped dead in his tracks. And I guess during the next two
seconds you could have heard a pin drop.</p><p>"'So this is where you've hidden yourself,' said the smaller of the two
men—the one who had done most of the talking. 'I don't think we'll
trouble you for those drinks, barman.'</p><p>"Without another word he walked out of the place—and after a moment or
two the other man started to follow him. He hesitated as he got abreast
of Jimmy, and then for the first time Mainwaring spoke:</p><p>"'Is she here?'</p><p>"'Yes,' answered the other. 'On board the yacht. There's a whole party
of us.'</p><p>"And with that he stepped into the street and joined his pal. With a
perfectly inscrutable look on his face Jimmy watched them as they walked
through the glaring sun and got into the small motor–boat that was
waiting alongside the quay. Then he came up to the bar.</p><p>"'An artistic touch, doubtless, on the part of Fate,' he remarked,
quietly. 'But a little unnecessary.'</p><p>"And I guess I metaphorically took off my hat to him at that moment.
What he'd done, why he was there, I neither knew nor cared; all that
mattered to me was the way he took that last rotten twist of the
surgeon's knife. Not by the quiver of an eyelid would you have known
that anything unusual had happened: he drank his three double–gins at
exactly the same rate as every other morning. And then he too swung out
of the bar, and went back to his office in McAndrew's warehouse, leaving
me to lie down on my bed and sweat under the mosquito curtains, while I
wondered at the inscrutable working out of things. Was it blind, the
Fate that moved the pieces; or was there some definite pattern beyond
our ken? At the moment it seemed pretty blind and senseless; later
on—well, you'll be able to form your own opinion.</p><p>"You know how quickly darkness falls in those latitudes. And it was just
before sunset that I saw a boat shoot away from the side of the yacht
and come full speed for the shore. I remember I wondered casually who
was the mug who would leave a comfortable yacht for Nwambi, especially
after the report of it that must have been given by our two morning
visitors. And then it struck me that, whoever it might be, he was
evidently in the deuce of a hurry. Almost before the boat came alongside
a man sprang out and scrambled up the steps. Then at a rapid double he
came sprinting towards me as I stood at the door of the bar. It was the
smaller of the two men who had been ashore that morning, and something
was evidently very much amiss.</p><p>"'Where is she?' he shouted, as soon as he came within earshot. 'Where's
my wife, you damned scoundrel?'</p><p>"Seeing that he was quite beside himself with worry and alarm, I let the
remark go by.</p><p>"'Steady!' I said, as he came gasping up to me. 'I haven't got your
wife; I haven't even seen her.'</p><p>"'It's that card–sharper!' he cried. 'By God! I'll shoot him like a dog,
if he's tried any monkey–tricks!'</p><p>"'Dry up, and pull yourself together,' I said angrily. 'If you're
alluding to Jimmy Mainwaring―'</p><p>"And at that moment Jimmy himself stepped out of his office and strolled
across the road.</p><p>"'You swine, you cursed card–cheat—where's Sylvia?'</p><p>"'What the devil are you talking about?' said Jimmy, and his voice was
tense.</p><p>"'She came ashore this afternoon, saying she would return in an hour,'
said the other man. 'I didn't know it at the time, Mr.—er—Mainwaring,
I believe you call yourself. The boat came back for her, and she was not
there. That was four hours ago. Where is she?'</p><p>"He was covering Jimmy with his revolver as he spoke.</p><p>"'Four hours ago, Clavering! Good heavens! man—put down your gun. This
isn't a time for amateur theatricals.' He brushed past him as if he was
non–existent and came up to me. 'Did you see Lady Clavering?'</p><p>"'Not a trace,' I answered, and the same fear was in both of us.</p><p>"'Did she say what she was coming on shore for?' He swung round on the
husband.</p><p>"'To have a look round,' answered Clavering, and his voice had altered.
No longer was he the outraged husband; he was a frightened man relying
instinctively on a bigger personality than himself.</p><p>"'If she's not about here, she must have gone inland,' said Jimmy,
staring at me. 'And it'll be dark in five minutes.'</p><p>"'My God!' cried Clavering, 'what are we to do? She can't be left alone
for the night. Lost—in this cursed country! She may have hurt
herself—sprained her ankle.'</p><p>"For a moment neither of us answered him. Even more than he did we
realise the hideous danger of a white woman alone in the bush inland.
There were worse dangers than snakes and wild animals to be feared. And
it was as we were standing there staring at one another, and afraid to
voice our thoughts, that one of McAndrew's native boys came down the
street. He was running and out of breath; and the instant he saw Jimmy
he rushed up to him and started gabbling in the local patois. He spoke
too fast for me to follow him, and Clavering, of course, couldn't
understand a word. But we both guessed instinctively what he was talking
about and we both watched Jimmy's face. And as we watched it I heard
Clavering catch his breath sharply.</p><p>"At last the boy finished, and Jimmy turned and looked at me. On his
face was a look of such cold malignant fury that the question which was
trembling on my lips died away, and I stared at him speechlessly.</p><p>"'The Dagos have got her,' he said, very softly. 'Don Pedro Salvas is, I
fear, a foolish man.'</p><p>"Clavering gave a sort of hoarse cry, and Jimmy's face softened.</p><p>"'Poor devil,' he said. 'Your job is going to be harder than mine. Go
back to your yacht—get all your men on shore that you can spare—and if
I'm not back in four hours, wait for dawn and then strike inland over
the swamp. Find Pedro Salvas's house—and hang him on the highest tree
you can find.'</p><p>"Without another word he swung on his heel and went up the street at a
long, steady lope. Twice Clavering called after him, but he never turned
his head or altered his stride—and then he started to follow himself.
It was I who stopped him, and he cursed me like a child—almost weeping.</p><p>"'Do what he told you,' I said. 'You'd never find your way; you'd be
worse than useless. I'll go with him: you get back and bring your men
ashore.'</p><p>"And with that I followed Jimmy. At times I could see him, a faint white
figure in the darkness, as he dodged through that fever–laden swamp; at
times I found myself marvelling at the condition of the man, bearing in
mind his method of living. Steadily, tirelessly, he forged ahead, and
when he came to the foot–hills I hadn't gained a yard on him.</p><p>"And then I began wondering what was going to happen when he reached
Salvas's bungalow, and by what strange mischance the girl had met the
owner. That it was revenge I was certain; he had recognised her from the
picture, and I remember thinking how bitter must have been his hatred of
Mainwaring to have induced him to run such an appalling risk. For the
risk was appalling, even in that country of strange happenings.</p><p>"I don't think that Jimmy troubled his head over any such speculations.
In his mind there was room for only one thought—an all–sufficient
thought—to get his hands on Pedro Salvas. I don't think he even knew
that I was behind him, until after it was over and the curtain was
falling on the play. And then he had no time for me."</p><p>Merton gave a short laugh that had in it a touch of sadness.</p><p>"A good curtain it was, too," he continued, quietly. "I remember I made
a frantic endeavour to overtake him as he raced up to the house, and
then, because I just couldn't help myself, I stopped and
watched—fascinated. The window of the big living–room was open, and the
light blazed out. I suppose they had never anticipated pursuit that
night. Leaning up against the wall was the girl, with a look of frozen
horror on her face, while seated at the table were Pedro Salvas and
three of his pals. And they were drinking.</p><p>"It all happened very quickly. For one second I saw Jimmy Mainwaring
framed in the window—then he began shooting. I don't think I've
mentioned that he could shoot the pip out of the ace of diamonds nine
times out of ten at twenty yards, and his madness did not interfere with
his aim. And that night he was stark, staring mad. I heard three
shots—so close together that only an artist could have fired them out
of the same revolver and taken aim; I saw the three friends of Pedro
Salvas collapse limply in their chairs. And then there was a pause; I
think Jimmy wanted to get at <span class="emphasis"><em>him</em></span> with his hands.</p><p>"But it was not to be. Just for a moment the owner of the bungalow had
been so stupefied at the sudden appearance of the man he hated that he
had simply sat still, staring; but only for a moment. The movement of
his arm was so quick that I hardly saw it; I only noticed what seemed to
be a streak of light which shot across the room. And then I heard
Jimmy's revolver again—the tenth, the hundredth of a second too late.
He'd drilled Pedro Salvas through the heart all right—I watched the
swine crumple and fall with the snarl still on his face—but this time
the knife wasn't sticking in the wall.</p><p>"She got to him first," went on Merton, thoughtfully. "His knees were
sagging just as I got to the window, and she was trying to hold him up
in her arms. And then between us we laid him down, and I saw that the
end was very near. There was nothing I could do; the knife was clean
into his chest. The finish of the journey had come to the man who could
not get drunk. And so I left them together, while I mounted guard by the
window with a gun in each hand. It wasn't a house to take risks in.</p><p>"He lived, I think, for five minutes, and of those five minutes I would
rather not speak. There are things which a man may tell, and things
which he may not. Sufficient be it to say that he may have cheated at
cards or he may not—she loved him. If, indeed, he had committed the
unforgivable sin amongst gentlemen all the world over, he atoned for it.
And she loved him. Let us leave it at that.</p><p>"And when it was over, and the strange, bitter spirit of the man who
called himself Jimmy Mainwaring had gone out on the unknown road, I
touched her on the shoulder. She rose blindly and stumbled out into the
darkness at my side. I don't think I spoke a word to her, beyond telling
her to take my arm. And after a while she grew heavier and heavier on
it, until at last she slipped down—a little unconscious heap of sobbing
girlhood."</p><p>Merton paused and lit a cigarette with a smile.</p><p>"So that is how it was ordained that I should carry the Lady Sylvia
Clavering, slung over my shoulder like a sack of potatoes, for three
miles. I remember staggering into the village to find myself surrounded
by men from the yacht. I handed her over to her distracted husband, and
then I rather think I fainted myself. I know I found myself in my own
bar, with people pouring whisky down my throat. And after a while they
cleared off, leaving Clavering alone with me. He began to stammer out
his thanks, and I cut him short.</p><p>"'No thanks are due to me,' I said. 'They're due to another man whom you
called a card–cheat—but who was a bigger man than either you or I are
ever likely to be.'</p><p>"'Was?' he said, staring at me.</p><p>"'Yes,' I answered. 'He's dead.'</p><p>"He stood there silently for a moment or two; then with a queer look on
his face he took off his hat.</p><p>"'You're right,' he said. 'He was a bigger man than me.'"</p><p>Merton got up and pressed the bell.</p><p>"I've never seen him from that day to this," he said, thoughtfully. "I
never saw his wife again until to–night. And I've never filled in the
gaps in the story. Moreover, I don't know that I want to."</p><p>A waiter came over to his chair.</p><p>"You'll join me? Two whiskies–and–sodas, please, waiter—large ones."</p></section><footer/></body></html>