<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter 3</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch02.xhtml" title="Chapter 2"/><link rel="next" href="ch04.xhtml" title="Chapter 4"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter 3" epub:type="chapter" id="id460"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter 3</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>Finding Mira</em></h3></div></div></div><p>The sheriff and the coroner got there late in the afternoon. Both of
them were chewing tobacco. McCain and Albert Panzer followed them,
riding roan horses. D’Orr, the Broken Circle owner, was riding a
spectacular white Arabian mare.</p><p>“Where’s Ben Duck?” the sheriff asked.</p><p>“He rode off early in the afternoon,” explained one of the old maids.
“He said he would be back by dark.”</p><p>The sheriff looked over the scene briefly. He told the coroner, “I guess
it’s just a job for you, Henry.” The coroner nodded. He had two
saddlebags full of instruments. “If you people have weak stomachs, you
better go off where you can’t see,” he said.</p><p>D’Orr demanded in an astonished voice, “Don’t you have to have some kind
of legal paper before you perform an autopsy?”</p><p>“This ain’t no autopsy,” the coroner said. “This is just an
examination.”</p><p>The Sun had fallen low in the west, so that jagged hills threw long
shadows. The shadows were gloomy and cold. At this altitude, the days
were hot and the nights astonishingly cold.</p><p>Ben Duck rode up in the twilight. Dust had caked on the flanks of his
pinto. Ben looked tired.</p><p>“Well?” he asked the sheriff.</p><p>“Hello, Ben,” the sheriff said. “Henry here”—he nodded toward the
coroner—“is just finishing up.”</p><p>“I’ll tell you what he died of in a minute,” the coroner said, and went
on working.</p><p>Ben slid off Patches and loosened the cinches. The pony hung his head
and pulled at a tuft of buffalo grass without enthusiasm.</p><p>“Ben, did you backtrack him very far?” the sheriff asked.</p><p>“’Bout five miles,” Ben Duck explained. “Then I lost the trail. He come
across those lava beds south of here, where nobody on earth could track
him.”</p><p>“Would a bloodhound do any good?”</p><p>“I doubt it,” Ben said. “A bloodhound is all right where there is a
little moisture to hold the scent. But the sun would bake the trail
right off that lava.”</p><p>D’Orr said abruptly, “It seems foolish to me to waste time trying to
find the poor fellow’s back trail.”</p><p>Ben looked at him. “Does it?” he said dryly.</p><p>The coroner straightened. He wiped his hands on an old undershirt he was
using for a towel. “Starvation and thirst,” he said. “That’s what killed
him.”</p><p>Ben stared at him. “Starvation and thirst?”</p><p>“Uh–huh. He ain’t had either food or water for two weeks, I should
judge. He had some grass and cactus meat in his stomach, and something I
think was a ground squirrel or a rat. He had eaten some dirt, too.”</p><p>“Dirt?”</p><p>“They eat dirt in the advance stages of starvation,” the coroner
explained.</p><p>Ben scratched behind one ear. “Did you look in his pack, Henry?”</p><p>“Yeah.”</p><p>“What’d you find?”</p><p>“Food and water,” the coroner admitted.</p><p>D’Orr said abruptly, “It seems obvious that the poor fellow went
insane.”</p><p>“Crazy or not,” said Ben, “he had food.”</p><p>“When people go crazy, they get strange ideas.” D’Orr shrugged. “This
poor devil must have got the insane idea he did not have food or water
in his pack.”</p><p>Ben rolled a cigarette, did not say anything.</p><p>“I guess that’s it,” the coroner said.</p><p>Ben licked the cigarette, lighted it, frowned at the dying match. He did
not recall ever having seen a crazy man. Cowmen were always claiming
sheepherders were crazy, but of course they weren’t. Ben did not believe
a man could get so crazy he would die of thirst and starvation when he
had food and water in the pack on his back.</p><p>“Any of you ever hear of a man named Doc Savage?” Ben asked.</p><p>McCain stared at Ben steadily. He did not speak.</p><p>No one said anything. But after a while, McCain accosted Ben Duck out of
earshot of the others. “Why are you interested in Doc Savage?” McCain
asked.</p><p>“Oh, I was just curious,” Ben said.</p><p>“He connected with this thing?”</p><p>Ben countered, “Do you know him?”</p><p>“I’ve heard of him,” McCain admitted.</p><p>“What have you heard about Doc Savage?” Ben asked.</p><p>McCain’s strangely pale face was inscrutable under his white hair. He
said, “I don’t recall.”</p><p>Ben eyed the man. More than ever, he was convinced there was something
strange about McCain. “Kinda seems,” Ben said, “that neither one of us
has much to tell the other one.”</p><p>McCain hesitated. “Does look that way,” he said. Then he walked away.</p><p>The sheriff and the coroner had borrowed a new buckboard from the Broken
Circle. Ben helped them load the body into the vehicle. Then he mounted
his horse and rode alongside the buckboard and its tarp–covered load.</p><p>D’Orr trotted his white Arabian up beside Patches. “Got a match?” he
asked. D’Orr had not mastered the Western way of riding, body moving
easily with the motion of the animal. He insisted on posting.</p><p>Ben said, “You ought to get used to not bouncing around in the saddle
like that, boss. That’s all right for taking a gallop in them city
parks, but out here you do it all day and it’ll shake an entrail loose.”</p><p>D’Orr seemed not to hear the advice. He said, “I just happened to
remember—I’ve heard of that Doc Savage you mentioned.”</p><p>Ben was interested. “You have? Who is he?”</p><p>“Why did you ask about him?” D’Orr inquired.</p><p>“Curiosity,” Ben said. “I heard his name some place. What do you know
about him?”</p><p>D’Orr said, “I don’t know much, really. As I recall it, Doc Savage is in
the East somewhere. New York, I believe. He is an adventurer of some
kind. At least, his name is frequently connected with the wildest kind
of excitement. That’s about all I know. By the way, who mentioned his
name to you?”</p><p>“Feller I met.”</p><p>“Was it”—D’Orr nodded at the body in the buckboard—“him?”</p><p>Ben glanced sidewise at the adhesive tape on D’Orr’s face. The tape
covered a lot of the man’s visage. It could have been D’Orr’s face he
had worked on with the spur.</p><p>Ben told a flat lie.</p><p>“Of course not,” he said.</p><p>D’Orr spurred his Arabian suddenly and the great white animal bounded
away with a thunder of hoofs on stone. Ben scowled after him, then
looked around.</p><p>Albert Panzer was riding well behind the others. Ben dropped back and
joined him. “You had any more faintin’ spells?” Ben asked Panzer.</p><p>The grin that came on Panzer’s lips was wry. “I found a book on altitude
sickness today. It don’t affect a man like you and me were affected.”</p><p>“I didn’t think it did,” Ben said. He nodded in the direction of D’Orr,
then toward McCain. “Both them gents are very curious about how I come
to mention somebody named Doc Savage,” he said.</p><p>Albert Panzer looked around secretively. “I wanted to talk to you about
that,” he said in a low voice.</p><p>“You ever hear of this Savage?” Ben asked.</p><p>“I’ll say I have!” Panzer drew a deep breath. “He’s an amazing man.”</p><p>Ben glanced at Albert Panzer slyly, and they tightened reins on their
horses so as to drop even farther behind. Ben scratched his head.
“Amazing man, huh?”</p><p>“Probably the greatest scientific genius of our day,” Panzer said. “He
is a man who is famous in the fields of chemistry, electricity, surgery,
engineering, archaeology. And, mind you, I don’t mean famous the way a
movie star is famous, or a politician. Not because of a build–up. Not
newspaper famous. The public does not know a great deal about Doc
Savage’s work. But great chemists, electricians, surgeons, all know of
his ability.”</p><p>“Ever meet this Doc Savage?” Ben asked.</p><p>“Not personally. I have heard of him, is all.”</p><p>Ben said, “D’Orr seemed to think of him as an adventurer. He said—I
think these were his words—‘Savage is connected with the wildest land
of excitement, usually.’”</p><p>“Savage might be called that.”</p><p>“But you said he was a scientist.”</p><p>“I think Savage uses his scientific skill to help people who are in
trouble,” Panzer said. “I know I’ve heard him referred to as a man who
rights wrongs and punishes evildoers.”</p><p>Ben said, “That don’t sound like a payin’ job to me.”</p><p>Albert Panzer shrugged. “I’m just telling you what I heard.”</p><p>Ben eyed him curiously. “How come you didn’t out with this information
when I first asked?”</p><p>“I figured,” Panzer explained slyly, “that you might want it
confidentially.”</p><p>“What gave you that idea?”</p><p>“Didn’t the dead man mention Doc Savage to you?” Panzer asked.</p><p>Ben was all set for that. He told another lie.</p><p>“Of course not,” he said.</p><p>Panzer seemed surprised. He hardly registered belief. Then he shrugged,
and they rode in silence.</p><p>Coyotes were howling on the hills long before they got back to the
Broken Circle. The night sky was as clear as ice, and about the same
color. They turned up their collars, for they could see their breath.</p><p>The coroner was also undertaker, and he had left his hearse at the
ranch. They transferred the body. Ben assisted. D’Orr, McCain, Panzer
and the others had turned their horses over to cowboys and gone into the
house.</p><p>“Ben.”</p><p>“Yeah, sheriff,” Ben said.</p><p>“How’d you come to mention Doc Savage?” the sheriff asked.</p><p>“Don’t tell me you know him, too!”</p><p>“Yep. By hearsay, that is.”</p><p>Ben muttered, “My education has sure been neglected some. I never heard
of the gent, but everybody else seems to know him by reputation.”</p><p>“He’s sure got a reputation,” the sheriff said dryly. “Why’d you ask if
anybody knowed him?”</p><p>Ben tilted his head back and contemplated the blue–cold sky
thoughtfully. “That old jasper,” he explained, “just before he died,
asked me if I knew Doc Savage. I was curious about it.”</p><p>“Ummm. I see.” The sheriff drove a small coupe. This pulled a trailer in
which he carried a saddle horse. “I think we’re gonna be able to find
out who the old man was.”</p><p>“There wasn’t anything on him that gave his name,” Ben said.</p><p>“You looked, eh?”</p><p>“Sure.”</p><p>“You didn’t take anything off the body, did you?”</p><p>“What gave you that idea?” Ben inquired innocently.</p><p>“It just struck me as curious that he was packin’ around an empty
saddlebag,” the sheriff explained.</p><p>Ben’s grunt was without humor. “He was crazy. He was so locoed that he
died of starvation and thirst while he was carryin’ around a pack full
of food. Why wouldn’t he be nut enough to carry an empty saddlebag?”</p><p>The sheriff said nothing more for a moment. Then he pulled out a rather
new gold watch that was obviously expensive. “This watch,” he said, “was
on the old man. It’s a watch that cost a lot of shekels. It’s got a
number in it. Jewelry stores keep track of the watches they sell. I
think we can trace him through the watch number.” The sheriff grinned.
“I bet you never thought of that, Ben.”</p><p>“This county has sure got a good sheriff,” Ben said cheerfully.</p><p>He helped load the sheriff’s pony into the trailer. The officer drove
away. The hearse had already gone.</p><p>An hour and forty minutes later, the sheriff was back. He arrived in the
hearse with the coroner. Each man wore nothing but his underwear shorts,
and they were enraged.</p><p>“We was road–agented!” the sheriff roared. “Where’s a gun? Loan me a
Winchester, somebody. Where’s the telephone? I want a posse!”</p><p>Ben asked, “They get the body?”</p><p>“Heck, no. They wanted what mazuma me and Henry had, was all!” The
sheriff rushed into the ranchhouse.</p><p>His neck red with rage, the officer telephoned his deputies in town,
telling them to spread an alarm with the State police and the forest
rangers. He described the robbers. There had been two of them. One was
taller than the other by an inch. One wore denim overalls, the other
gray store pants. One was wearing a gray cap. The sheriff couldn’t
remember which one wore the cap.</p><p>“Sheriff,” Ben said dryly, “did they get that watch?”</p><p>“Blast it, yes!” the sheriff growled. “And I don’t remember that number
in it.”</p><p>Ben said, “I got the number.”</p><p>“Huh?”</p><p>“I looked in the watch early this afternoon and got the number,” Ben
explained.</p><p>“Why in billyhell you do that?”</p><p>“Sheriff, did it look to you like these highjackers might really have
been lookin’ for that watch?” Ben countered.</p><p>“Huh?” The officer frowned at him. “How did you know—what gave you that
idea?”</p><p>“So they were lookin’ for it,” Ben said. “Say, did you tell anybody else
you was gonna trace the old man through the watch?”</p><p>“I mentioned it to the others, yes.”</p><p>“That,” Ben said, “is right interestin’.”</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>The sheriff stared over Ben’s head. “It ain’t as interestin’,” he said,
“as what I’m gonna show you now.”</p><p>McCain’s white head showed in the darkness. He had limped up to listen
to the uproar.</p><p>The sheriff grabbed Ben’s six–shooter, examined the cylinder to make
sure it contained cartridges, then walked over to McCain.</p><p>Jamming the gun in McCain’s ribs, the sheriff said, “You’re under
arrest! I’m charging you with being one of the road agents that just
held me up.”</p><p>McCain showed no emotion. His face fixed, he said, “This is ridiculous.”</p><p>“No, it ain’t,” the sheriff growled. “I didn’t tell all I knowed about
that holdup. You see, the headlights of my car picked up one of the
holdup men as I turned around to come back. I saw him plain. I didn’t
stop because I didn’t have no gun. I didn’t let on.”</p><p>“Utterly preposterous.” Ben Duck was fascinated by McCain’s control as
the man spoke.</p><p>“Oh, it was you, all right.” The sheriff fished out a pair of handcuffs.
“Ducked down in a gully and crouched against some sagebrush, didn’t you?
Didn’t think I saw you, did you?”</p><p>McCain said, “I didn’t rob you.”</p><p>“You’re the feller I’m arrestin’ for it,” the sheriff told him.</p><p>The sheriff drove away with McCain his prisoner.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>The following day, Ben Duck had to work hard at fixing fence, which was
the only job he liked less than dude wrangling. He was therefore out of
touch with what was going on until that evening, when he telephoned the
sheriff and was informed the officer was out of town, hunting McCain.</p><p>“I thought the sheriff arrested McCain,” Ben said.</p><p>“He did,” the deputy advised him. “And put him in jail. Trouble is, the
jail only held this McCain about thirty minutes.”</p><p>“McCain escaped?” Ben asked.</p><p>“Quicker’n you could bat an eye. Picked the cell lock, somehow.” The
deputy swore. “McCain didn’t answer any questions.”</p><p>“I’ll be durned!” Ben said.</p><p>Later that night, he locked himself in his bunkhouse room and examined
the puzzle. Made by hand, he decided. It was a strange item for an old
man to be carrying around in his saddlebag. One sure thing, it was
handmade, not a factory product. It had obviously been made
painstakingly by hand, the work showing vast patience, rather than
skill. The little feathers had been carved painstakingly out of lead.
Ben noted some machine markings on one of the feathers that led him to
decide they had been whittled out of bullets.</p><p>It was a tough puzzle. He spent an hour getting all the leaden feathers
into the eagle. But still he did not have anything sensible.</p><p>He used his jackknife and took it apart. He did not learn anything. He
put it back together carefully.</p><p>The puzzle would exactly fit inside a large flat tin which had contained
cigarettes. Ben closed it inside the tin, then pressed adhesive tape
carefully around the edges. He applied more tape until he was sure the
thing was waterproof.</p><p>Next Ben got two of his dirty shirts and a pair of Levis and hid the
taped cigarette tin containing the puzzle in these. He walked out to the
horse–watering tank.</p><p>D’Orr was a tightfisted ranch owner. His cowboys had to do their own
laundry, and it was customary to do the hurry–up jobs at the
horse–watering tank.</p><p>There was nearly a foot of mud in the bottom of the horse tank. After he
had been washing his shirts for a while, Ben jammed the sealed cigarette
tin down into the mud.</p><p>It was as good a hiding place for the puzzle as any Ben could think of,
since there was no chance of the mud being cleaned out of the tank. They
had cleaned the mud out that spring, only to discover that the tank
leaked like the dickens with the mud out. They had been forced to shove
the mud back in.</p><p>Washing finished, Ben hung the garments on a corral fence. He went back
to his room. He noticed that his pillow was not lying where it had been.
Also he found tiny holes in his Sunday boot soles which looked as if
someone had been exploring with a darning needle.</p><p>He loaded his six–shooter with real bullets and slept with it under his
pillow.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>The Broken Circle was thirty–six miles from town. Ben was supposed to
spend the next day fixing fence again, but he merely rode over the hill,
picketed Patches within reach of grass and water, and headed off the
ranch station wagon as it went in after the mail. He climbed in. The
driver of the station wagon grinned, said, “Fancy britches didn’t say
anything about a passenger into town.”</p><p>“D’Orr?” Ben returned the grin. “He told me to fix fence.”</p><p>The town had one street, no railroad. Visitors arrived by stage—it was
actually a common bus, but this was dude–ranch country so everybody
called the bus a stage—and freight was trucked in.</p><p>The sheriff was brushing the dust off a five–gallon white beaver hat he
used for rodeos and special occasions.</p><p>“I’m headin’ for the stage station,” he told Ben. “Come on, if you
wanta.” He scowled. “I can’t find that McCain gent.”</p><p>They walked down the street. Ben asked, “You do anything with the
numbers of that watch I give you? You learn anything?”</p><p>“The old man’s name,” said the sheriff, “was Pilatus Casey.”</p><p>“Pilatus Casey, eh. Funny name.”</p><p>“He lived in New York.”</p><p>“Oh. He wasn’t a prospector, then?”</p><p>“Niece said he came out here about a month ago for his health.”</p><p>“Niece?”</p><p>“Only livin’ relation, far as I found. She was his sister’s daughter.
That makes her a niece, don’t it? I always forget just what relation a
niece is.”</p><p>“I think that would make her his niece,” Ben said. “What’s her name?”</p><p>“Mira. Mira Lanson. I’ll introduce her to you.”</p><p>“You’ll <span class="emphasis"><em>what</em></span>?”</p><p>“She’s due on the stage in a few minutes.”</p><p>Ben scratched his jaw. “She sure hightailed it out here.”</p><p>“I telegraphed her, and she called me back by telephone. Then she caught
an airplane.”</p><p>Ben bought the sheriff a cigar in the stage station, the place also
being a soft drink, tobacco and general merchandise store. They stood
there contemplating a stuffed elk head over the back bar. The stage was
about due.</p><p>Mira. So the dead man’s niece was named Mira. He had promised to give
Mira the puzzle where you feathered an eagle. He’d promised the old man
while he was dying. But he wished he knew what the darned thing was.</p><p>A long yellow bus pulled up in front of the door.</p><p>“Here’s the stage,” the sheriff said.</p><p>As soon as he saw Mira, Ben wished he’d thought to comb his hair. He
wished he’d put on his Sunday clothes, too.</p><p>The sheriff had come to life. He reminded Ben of an old red bull. He
held her hand and said, “Mira Lanson, this is Donald Duck, a cowboy out
at the Broken Circle.”</p><p>“The name is Ben,” Ben said, angrier at the sheriff than he had ever
imagined he could get.</p><p>“You look like a real cowboy,” Mira Lanson said. She took Ben’s hand and
almost electrocuted him. She was not so tall but that he could look over
her coppery head, little brown hat and pert feather and all, into the
sheriff’s eyes. She added, “I believe you were the one who——”</p><p>“That’s right,” Ben said uncomfortably. The male loafers were
straightening their hats and neckerchiefs. “I’ll take your bag,” Ben
said.</p><p>It was a very small and very new bag. It did not look expensive.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>The sheriff bustled around in his office, dusting off chairs
unnecessarily, shoving the spittoon under his desk, and turning on the
fan. Ben was irritated. The sheriff, the old goat, was old enough to be
her grandfather, even if he was a bachelor.</p><p>“I was hopin’,” said the sheriff, “that you could tell us what we don’t
know.”</p><p>In a surprised voice, she asked, “What is that?”</p><p>She had seated herself. She was wonderfully shaped; her traveling suit
gave you a good idea.</p><p>“What was your uncle, Pilatus Casey, doing out in these mountains?” the
sheriff asked.</p><p>“Why, he came to Wyoming because he thought the altitude would do his
sinus trouble some good. He had hay fever very badly, and he was also
convinced he had a touch of tuberculosis, although I don’t think he had.
That is the only reason I know of for his coming.”</p><p>“I see.” The sheriff hesitated delicately. “Then you do not know of any
reason why anyone should try to keep us from identifying his body.”</p><p>Her eyes flew wide. They were the color of new pennies. “Oh, no!”</p><p>The sheriff squirmed. “Reason I ask, some road–agent hombres held me up
t’other night and robbed me of your uncle’s watch. Course, these bandits
took my pocketbook, too, so I guess it was just a holdup. Robber I’m
after is named McCain.”</p><p>“I don’t know him,” the girl said. “Can I—might I see my uncle’s body?”</p><p>The sheriff sprang up. “I’ll go find Henry, the undertaker, and have him
unlock his place for us. You stay here. I’ll come back.”</p><p>After the sheriff had gone, Ben studied Mira Lanson shyly. The presence
of pretty women always embarrassed him.</p><p>Suddenly he blurted, “Was your uncle crazy?” Then, seeing how completely
shocked was her expression, he added hastily, “That was what the sheriff
really wanted to ask you. Only he didn’t get around to it.”</p><p>She turned her copper eyes on him and his toes seemed to come loose.</p><p>“I don’t understand,” she said.</p><p>“Coroner’s verdict is that your uncle died of starvation and thirst,”
Ben explained. “But he had plenty of food and water in his pack.”</p><p>She turned a little pale. Not at once did she answer. Her hands twisted
a tiny brown handkerchief.</p><p>“I don’t know anything about that,” she said.</p><p>There was coldness in her tone that set him back.</p><p>Ben sat there a moment. The silence was heavy. Then Ben said, “Excuse me
a minute,” and got up and went into the back room.</p><p>He had sat in poker games in the back room, and he remembered what
pictures were on the wall. He took down one of the pictures. It was a
small photograph of the sheriff’s father. He pulled out the tacks and
removed it from its frame.</p><p>He carried the photograph of the sheriff’s father back and handed it to
the girl.</p><p>“I thought you might want this picture of Pilatus Casey,” he said, his
manner completely innocent.</p><p>The girl took the photograph. She looked at it, then quickly took out
her handkerchief and dabbed at her eyes.</p><p>“He—he was a wonderful man,” she said brokenly. “I think this picture
was taken within the last year.”</p><p>Ben swallowed with difficulty.</p><p>She was more than a pretty girl. She was one of the world’s biggest
liars.</p></section><footer/></body></html>