<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter 4</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch03.xhtml" title="Chapter 3"/><link rel="next" href="ch05.xhtml" title="Chapter 5"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter 4" epub:type="chapter" id="id480"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter 4</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>A Bad Day for Ducks</em></h3></div></div></div><p>The sheriff returned, saying that he had found Henry, and that the
undertaker would open his establishment. “I don’t believe I’ll go with
you,” Ben said.</p><p>As soon as the girl and the sheriff had left for the undertaker’s, Ben
hurried over to the stage station. He knew that the stage laid over half
an hour, and he was lucky enough to find the driver.</p><p>“Remember the little girl, the one with the copper hair, that you hauled
in?” Ben asked him.</p><p>“Yip, yip!” the driver said, grinning.</p><p>“I wonder where she came from,” Ben said.</p><p>“What I was wondering,” the driver said, “is where she’s been all my
life.”</p><p>“I ain’t kiddin’.”</p><p>The driver looked at Ben’s face. “Oh,” he said. He licked his lips.
“She—well—she came in on an airplane from the East. From New York. I
picked her up at the airport, after she made arrangements by telephone.”</p><p>“So she really came from New York—thanks,” Ben said.</p><p>He stood on the sidewalk and pondered. The girl was a liar; there was no
doubt of that. She wasn’t Mira Lanson, and old Pilatus Casey was not her
uncle. Or if she was Mira Lanson, then the old prospector wasn’t Pilatus
Casey. One sure thing, she had identified a picture of the sheriff’s old
dad as her uncle, falling neatly into Ben’s trap. Ben hooked his thumbs
in his belt and flapped his hands against his flat muscular stomach
absently until the sheriff and the girl came out of the undertaking
establishment. Then he joined them.</p><p>The girl was dabbing at an eye with the stamp–sized handkerchief. “Uncle
Pilatus—he liked the Western country,” she was telling the sheriff
jerkily. “I—I think he would like best to be buried here in Wyoming.
There are no other relatives.”</p><p>“Sure, sure, sure,” said the sheriff. “Glad to make all arrangements for
you, Miss Lanson. Your uncle would approve of your wishes. We got a nice
graveyard up on Rattlesnake Hill. Mighty nice graveyard.”</p><p>Ben said, “It ain’t called Rattlesnake Hill no more. The chamber of
commerce renamed it Ross Mound Cemetery. Have you forgot that, sheriff?”</p><p>The girl said, “I will need some place to stay.” She looked helpless for
a moment, then turned to Ben. “I—I wonder if the Broken Circle Ranch
would put me up?”</p><p>“I dunno,” Ben said dubiously.</p><p>He wondered: Now what the heck does she want to stay <span class="emphasis"><em>there</em></span> for?</p><p>“Course the Broken Circle can accommodate you,” the sheriff declared.
“They’re in that business. A big dude ranch is like a hotel.”</p><p>“I’ll telephone and find out,” Ben suggested.</p><p>He forgot, until he had D’Orr on the telephone, that he was supposed to
be out fixing fence. D’Orr inquired what in the black–so–and–so Ben was
doing in town. He used words that must have reddened the telephone
operator’s ears, if she was listening. However, he was mollified when he
heard Ben had a guest.</p><p>“Who’d you say she is?” D’Orr demanded.</p><p>“Says she is a Miss Mira Lanson, and that old prospector that died was
her uncle,” Ben told him.</p><p>D’Orr then became so enthusiastic that Ben was somewhat suspicious.</p><p>“Bring her right out, Donald,” D’Orr ordered. “Take the station wagon.
If Slim isn’t ready to come back with the mail and supplies, you drive
the girl out in the station wagon. You can go back later for Slim.”</p><p>“O.K.,” Ben said.</p><p>It developed that Slim was not ready to return to the ranch. He was
having his boots half–soled, and the work was not yet done. He’d wait,
he said. Ben should go ahead in the station wagon and take the new guest
out.</p><p>Ben loaded the girl and her bag into the station wagon. He headed out of
town, following the rough range road that led across the greasewood
flats, then up into the hills.</p><p>The girl’s silence finally irked Ben.</p><p>“Did your uncle look natural?” he asked her innocently.</p><p>“I hope <span class="emphasis"><em>this</em></span> looks more natural,” the girl said.</p><p>He realized she had a gun muzzle in his ribs.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>He took his foot off the accelerator.</p><p>She said, “Keep going. Pull off to the right. Stop on top of that hill,
yonder.”</p><p>The hill she indicated was one of the most prominent spots in that
section. The station wagon bumped over sagebrush and the gears made
grinding noises until they came to the top of the hill. Ben pulled on
the hand brake.</p><p>“You can cut the engine,” the girl said.</p><p>Ben turned the switch, then looked around. Off in the west, the
mountains stood up in a stony naked–looking fence. Visible habitations
included a number of dry–farmer shacks, a ranch or two and, off behind
the station wagon, a part of the town.</p><p>“Kind of a conspicuous place you picked,” he suggested. “Kind of
lonesome, too.”</p><p>“Keep your shirt on,” the girl said. “It won’t be lonesome for long.”</p><p>She was right.</p><p>There were two of them, and they came in a black pick–up truck which was
pulling a two–wheeled trailer with a stock rack. In the trailer two cow
ponies rode. It was the conventional rig used by cow ranchers, but the
pair in the pick–up were not cowmen.</p><p>The two men looked more like bankers—or dudes, at least. Their faces
were pale, their hands soft; their eyes did not have the sun–squint of
Western men.</p><p>“Thanks, Mira,” one of them said.</p><p>“He knows I’m not Mira,” the girl said. “Who are you—you’re not the man
who—you’re not Mr. Smith.”</p><p>The two men looked at each other. One of them said, “Mr. Smith!” The
other one laughed.</p><p>The girl looked suddenly worried, Ben thought.</p><p>The two came over and searched Ben. They found the six–shooter, which he
was carrying under his shirt, and which he’d not had a chance to use.</p><p>Ben eyed the girl, asked, “Who is Mr. Smith?”</p><p>She was wordless. She bit her lips.</p><p>Ben asked, “Where’d you tip off these gun mavericks that I was wise to
you?”</p><p>“While you were telephoning the ranch,” the girl said. “As soon as I saw
the body, I knew you had trapped me by showing me a picture that was not
Pilatus Casey.”</p><p>“Shut up!” one of the men growled.</p><p>The man had a harsh voice that was distinctive, and Ben frowned at him.
“There’s somethin’ familiar about you, feller,” he said.</p><p>“You’re crazy,” the man muttered.</p><p>“How’s them spur tracks on your partner’s face?” Ben asked.</p><p>He knew by the change of expression on the man’s features that he had
guessed right. This was one of the men who had attacked him in his bunk
that night.</p><p>The girl seemed puzzled. Ben told her, “This gent and another one tried
to rob me one night recent. There was some shootin’ before they got
away, and I worked over one’s face with a spur.”</p><p>The girl began to get a look of horror.</p><p>The man who had taken part in the robbery came over to Ben. He said,
“You talk too much.”</p><p>“It would be funny,” Ben told him, “if the sheriff was to recognize you
as one of the fellers who road–agented him.”</p><p>“You talk too much,” the man said, “about the wrong things.”</p><p>“Yeah?”</p><p>“Suppose you talk,” the man said, “about Doc Savage?”</p><p>Ben was surprised. “What about him?”</p><p>“You was talkin’ to different people at the Broken Circle about Doc
Savage,” the man said. “We want to know why.” There was rock–hard
earnestness in his voice.</p><p>“I’ll be durned,” Ben said.</p><p>“Another thing.” The man leaned down to scowl. “Where’s the puzzle?”</p><p>“What puzzle?”</p><p>“The one where you feather an eagle,” the man said. “Where’s it?”</p><p>“You talk like a crazy man,” Ben said.</p><p>“Yeah,” the man said. “I was afraid of that.”</p><p>Ben was never quite sure what he was hit with. The other man did the
hitting. It was very hard, whatever it was. And there was an empty black
space.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>The canyon walls were the color of a fawn two or three days old; the
color of a fawn so young that its coat had not yet lost the protective
coloring of spots given by nature. The canyon walls were very high. They
seemed to come together overhead.</p><p>Ben’s head felt as big as the canyon. When he moved it, the head hurt
and roared. He lay still, except for his hands and feet, which he moved.
Both hands and feet were tied.</p><p>A man came over. He was a big man, dressed in dark clothes, with a dark
handkerchief over his face.</p><p>“Where’s the eagle puzzle?” he asked.</p><p>Ben looked at the man closely.</p><p>“You’re Albert Panzer,” he said.</p><p>The man kicked him lightly in the ribs. The kick hurt Ben’s head worse
than it did his ribs.</p><p>“Where’s the green eagle?” the man growled.</p><p>Ben said, “I’ll be a ring–tailed Piute! I never suspected you, Panzer.”</p><p>The man with the mask swore. He took off the mask. It was Albert Panzer.
“Where’s it?” he yelled.</p><p>“I suspected McCain,” Ben said, “and I was ’most sure D’Orr might be
guilty. But I didn’t suspect you, Panzer.”</p><p>“Where’s the eagle puzzle?”</p><p>“Them two hombres got it when they jumped me in my bunk that night,” Ben
explained.</p><p>“I don’t mean that one,” Panzer snarled.</p><p>Ben shrugged. “You’re talkin’ over my head, then,” he said. He hoped his
face was straight, hoped it sounded like the truth.</p><p>Panzer got down beside Ben. His face was dark. Ben thought he heard the
man’s teeth grind together in rage.</p><p>“Why were you askin’ questions about Doc Savage?” Panzer demanded.</p><p>Ben narrowed an eye.</p><p>“Suppose I ask you a question,” he said. “Suppose I ask you what this is
all about?”</p><p>Panzer made a sound of rage and dashed a handful of sand into Ben’s
eyes. It was painful—the sand made such agony that it was all of twenty
minutes before he could see. By that time, it was getting dark, and
suddenly quite cold.</p><p>They had a camp. There were no tents, but bedrolls were spread out on
the sand. Huge boulders were all about on the canyon floor, and on top
of one of these lay a man with a telescope almost as long as a rifle. A
lookout. They were hiding out among the boulders. No one paid attention
to Ben. They cooked a meal—using tins of canned heat which gave no
smoke. They ate, but no one offered Ben food.</p><p>Panzer gave an order and picked up a lasso rope. He came over to Ben,
and two of the men—there were four in the camp, in addition to Panzer
and the sixth fellow up on the high boulder with the telescope—stripped
Ben down to his underwear. The cold night air whipped at his exposed
skin. They drove four stakes in a square about twelve feet on each side.
They staked Ben out between the stakes.</p><p>“While you get good and cold, you can think about talkin’,” Albert
Panzer said.</p><p>“About what?”</p><p>“Why you was talkin’ about Doc Savage, and what became of that puzzle.”</p><p>“I told you who got the puzzle.”</p><p>“There was another one.”</p><p>“Oh, go to the devil!” Ben snarled.</p><p>“If a nice freezin’ treatment don’t bring you around,” Albert Panzer
said, “we’ll hunt up some red ants tomorrow. When red ants crawl in your
ears, they’re really somethin’.”</p><p>They went back to their bedrolls. Panzer had sounded utterly fierce, and
Ben wondered how he could have been so fooled by the fellow.</p><p>Now and then, as the hours dragged, one of them got up and came over to
turn the shaded beam of a flashlight on Ben to make sure he was there,
and the first few times Ben glared back in stoical silence, although he
was blue with cold and in the most complete agony he had ever suffered.
Later on, he cursed the man with the flashlight roundly, and tried to
expectorate on him, but there was not much satisfaction in that, because
the man poured sand in his open mouth unexpectedly.</p><p>Later, much later—it must have been past midnight—there was a soft
sound nearby. Ben wondered if he could bump the other with his head and
knock the man unconscious. And a low whisper said, “Ben—quiet—shhh!”</p><p>It was the girl. She breathed, “Listen. I’m going to help you.”</p><p>“Yeah,” Ben said. “I bet.”</p><p>“Shhh!” She was silent for a while, listening. But no one came. She
said, “They’re going to kill you as soon as they find out what they want
to know. I didn’t bargain on anything like that.”</p><p>“What <span class="emphasis"><em>did</em></span> you bargain on?” Ben’s whisper was sarcastic.</p><p>She spoke earnestly. “I know I was a fool. But I was broke and out of
work, and I was an actress. When they came to me and offered me fairly
good money to impersonate a girl named Mira Lanson, I couldn’t resist.”</p><p>“Is that your story? Don’t tell me you were dumb enough not to see there
was somethin’ crooked in it.”</p><p>“When you’re hungry, you’re inclined to take chances.”</p><p>“Where did this happen?”</p><p>“New York. The man who hired me was named Mr. Smith—or so he said.”</p><p>“Is he here now?”</p><p>“Did you see that man lying up on the rock with a telescope?”</p><p>“The lookout? Yeah.”</p><p>“That’s Mr. Smith.”</p><p>She evidently had a knife, for his arms and legs were suddenly free. He
tried to sit up. It was all he could do to keep from yelping in agony.
He was stiff. Bending his arms and legs was like trying to break sticks.</p><p>“Listen,” Ben muttered. “What’s behind this?”</p><p>“Don’t <span class="emphasis"><em>you</em></span> know?”</p><p>“No.”</p><p>“Well, I’m sure I don’t,” the girl said.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>Ben stood up. It was very dark, but he was acutely aware of his nearly
naked condition. The night wind stuck needles of ice into his skin.</p><p>The girl took hold of his arm. “Ben?”</p><p>“Yes?”</p><p>“I think we had better get away from here and call on Doc Savage,” she
said.</p><p>“I sure approve of the gettin’ away part, because I can see the need of
that,” Ben whispered. “But why ring in this Savage gent?”</p><p>“They’re afraid of him.”</p><p>“Why?”</p><p>“I don’t know. Unless it is because he has a reputation that frightens
criminals.”</p><p>Ben grasped her arm. “Come on,” he whispered. They moved away in the
darkness, and there was sand underfoot for a while. Ben had heard a
horse nicker near the mouth of the canyon, and he presumed the mounts
were picketed there. They went that way.</p><p>Sharp rocks began hurting his feet. It was a little less dark,
indicating they were nearing the canyon mouth. And somewhere close, a
horse breathed in deeply and blew out breath.</p><p>The string was stretched across the ground about knee height. It was a
binder twine. Ben hit it first, then went over and felt of it with his
fingers. He knew what it meant instantly.</p><p>“Quick!” he gasped. “A string across the canyon mouth. Other end must be
tied to some guy’s leg.” He shoved the girl toward the horses.</p><p>A man came up on them immediately. It was dark. Evidently he was afraid
to show a flashlight. “Hey!” he barked. “Who’s that?”</p><p>Ben said, “Keep your shut on. It’s just me,” in a calm voice that he
hoped would fool the other. He kept going toward the horses.</p><p>The girl was trembling. Suddenly Ben knew that she was genuine, that
this was no trick to get his confidence and pump information out of him.</p><p>The knowledge that the girl was really scared led him to make his next
move. That, and an innate chivalry that all cowhands have.</p><p>There were three men waiting at the horses. Ben had not known about
them. They must have been sleeping there, close to the animals. They
charged suddenly, all three of them, and fell upon Ben and the girl.</p><p>The girl cried out as an arm clamped her neck. Ben lunged toward her.
Another man dived for his legs, but he kept his feet. He struck with his
fist, dropped the man who had the girl.</p><p>“Get on a horse!” Ben yelled. “Get to Doc Savage!”</p><p>The girl hesitated, began wildly, “But you——”</p><p>“I’ll be all right,” Ben roared. “I’ll ride out of here by a different
route. I’ll be all right.”</p><p>He wasn’t all right. He was in a jam, and knew it. Three men against
him, and his muscles still as stiff as boards from cold and inactivity.
Someone got hold of his hair and put a thumb in his eye and began to
gouge. Ben dragged the thumb down into his mouth and did his best to
bite it off. The yelling of the owner of the thumb was gratifying.</p><p>By now, the girl had untied one of the horses, and mounted it.
Fortunately, it seemed she could ride.</p><p>“Ben!” she cried. “Are you——”</p><p>“I’m all right,” Ben howled. “I’m ready to leave here. Get goin’!”</p><p>The girl’s horse hammered away into the darkness.</p><p>Ben fought his three assailants, and eventually they got him down and
two of them held his arms while the third pounded at his head with a
rock. The rock was about the size of a baseball. The man wielding it hit
Ben’s head only about half the time. In time, he became senseless.</p></section><footer/></body></html>