<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter 5</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch04.xhtml" title="Chapter 4"/><link rel="next" href="ch06.xhtml" title="Chapter 6"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter 5" epub:type="chapter" id="id500"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter 5</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>The Big Man</em></h3></div></div></div><p>The girl had ridden before, but that had been with a saddle. She was
bareback now, however, and was having trouble. There was only a rope
around the neck of the wild cow pony she rode; she held on to that and
clenched both hands in the animal’s mane.</p><p>The beast thundered ahead, traveling through abysmal darkness with speed
that horrified her. She could not control it, would not have known where
to direct the animal if she could have. Rocks made loud noises under the
hoofs. Several times, overhanging branches struck her agonizing blows.
She hung on, protecting her face by burying it against the animal.</p><p>The horse went on and on. If there were sounds of pursuit behind her,
she did not hear them. And finally the animal was out on level range,
galloping. She called “Whoa!” But the bronc kept on. It did not buck.
Once it shied, and she heard a roar of pounding hoofs around about, and
had horrible moments when she thought that pursuers had surrounded her.
But the rumbling things in the night began to bellow, and she knew it
was cattle. She tried to pull the horse to a stop by hauling on the
rope, but that did not do any good.</p><p>The horse seemed to know where it was going. She let it go.</p><p>Later—it was so much later that it must have been near dawn—she
brought up suddenly, realizing that a horseman had ridden up beside her.</p><p>“Oh!” She gripped the rope, which she had rigged into a hackamore on her
pony’s nose.</p><p>It was a man. He was big in the darkness. He said, “You’re not lost, by
any chance?”</p><p>There was something in his voice, quiet strength possibly, that the girl
found suddenly comforting.</p><p>Eagerly, she said, “Yes! Oh, yes, I am. Do you live around here?”</p><p>“I’m staying not far away,” the man said.</p><p>“Listen,” the girl said. “I’ve got to get word to the sheriff. A young
man, a cowboy named Ben Duck, has fallen into the hands of some men who
are torturing him.”</p><p>The man’s voice took on vibrant interest. “Where is this Ben Duck being
held?”</p><p>“In a canyon west of here,” the girl said. “I have an approximate idea
of the place. And, listen, I’ve got to get to a telephone, too.”</p><p>“A telephone,” the man said. “Why?”</p><p>The girl did not know why she answered him freely with the truth. She
did not know then, but later, after she knew more about the man, she
understood it without surprise.</p><p>“There is a man named Doc Savage,” she said. “I must get word to him.”</p><p>“About what?”</p><p>“About this.”</p><p>“I see,” the man said, with calm power in his voice. “I understand.
Listen, there is a trail down at the foot of this hill. The trail, if
you turn right, leads to a ranch where there is a telephone. You ride
on.”</p><p>“Thank you,” she said, and kicked at the horse’s ribs with her heels.</p><p>“Wait,” the man said. “You say this canyon, this canyon where Ben Duck
is being held, is west of here?”</p><p>“Yes.”</p><p>“What direction are you facing now?”</p><p>“Why, east.”</p><p>He said quietly. “You are facing northwest. You have your directions
mixed up.” He got down and lifted one of her horses’ feet. “Your animal
is not shod. It will be almost impossible to follow your back trail.”</p><p>“Oh! What will I do?” she gasped.</p><p>The man seemed bothered. He turned a flashlight on, and examined the
ground. “There is almost no trail,” he said gently.</p><p>The girl hardly heard him. She was staring at his horse, at the animal’s
hip. Her eyes got wide with terror. There was a brand on the man’s
mount. She knew enough about brands to read this one. It was the Broken
Circle brand.</p><p>The man said, “I am going to ask you a question.”</p><p>“Yes?”</p><p>“This trouble that Ben Duck is in—has it got anything to do with a
puzzle about a green eagle?”</p><p>The girl took her fright between her clenched teeth. She leaned forward
suddenly and clutched the bridle of the man’s horse. She clutched the
bridle near the headstall, yanked, and the bridle came off. The horse
ran away, as she had known it would. Western ponies would not stand
unless their reins were dragging.</p><p>She pounded her own tired pony with her heels, and it ran. It ran even
faster than she had hoped.</p><p>She heard the man shout at her to stop, but she paid no heed. This man
was from the Broken Circle Ranch. He knew that Ben Duck was in trouble
because of something about a green eagle. She was frightened; afraid he
was one of her enemies.</p><p>She rode hard for half an hour. The pony breathed with such sobbing
gulps that she slowed the animal to a walk. She was aching with fatigue.
She knew that her appearance must be a mess.</p><p>Her fright instead of ebbing, had grown stronger. Tiredness seemed to
sharpen her ability to think. Behind this thing, she knew now, must be
something big. They had spent money and hired her to come out from New
York, just to trick a piece of information out of a cowboy. They had
wanted her to find an innocent–looking childish puzzle where you shook
lead feathers into holes in a green eagle. She wondered why she had not
realized there must be something terrible behind it. Her need for money,
she supposed, had made her stupid.</p><p>The sun came up.</p><p>With a kind of dumfounded horror, she realized there was a man behind
her. He was not more than half a mile back, and running. It was the same
man who had stopped her in the night. The man whose horse she had driven
off. He was following her on foot.</p><p>She was amazed he could have kept so close to her. Her horse had run
fast. She would have wagered everything that no man could have kept
pace. But there he was.</p><p>The pony breathed easier. She set him into a run, and increased her
lead. They got out on wide alkali flats, dotted with sagebrush and
prickly pear cactus. Dust knocked up underfoot, hung like little puffs
of finely carded cotton behind.</p><p>When the breathing of her pony labored, she slowed him to a lope. She
looked back often. She was really frightened now. For the man was
gaining again. He ran, she could see from that distance, easily.</p><p>The horse came to a prairie dog town, where the myriads of holes were a
menace. She guided the animal as carefully as she could with the
hackamore. Heat poured down from the sun, and the sharp barking of the
little tobacco–colored prairie dogs, their tails jerking when they
barked, seemed to ridicule her.</p><p>Her body ached intolerably. She was thirsty. Her hands seemed to contain
only pain when she tried to clench her fingers in the pony’s mane to
keep from falling off.</p><p>It must have been near ten o’clock when she came to a highway. Finding
the highway was luck.</p><p>She slid off her horse and staggered in front of the first car that came
moaning down the black–top pavement. The machine stopped for her.</p><p>“Take me to the nearest town!” she gasped. Then she told an untruth.
“I’ve got to find a doctor.”</p><p>A man and his wife rode in the car. It was an Iowa machine. The man
drove furiously, and his wife was sympathetic. She asked questions. The
girl muttered, in reply, something about an accident. The rest of the
time, she stared at the pavement, and ached.</p><p>It was forty–two miles to the town. She watched the speedometer, so she
knew. The town jumped at them suddenly from behind a hill, and it was
familiar.</p><p>“Wait!” the girl gasped. “The airport! Here, that lane just ahead—turn
in there.” She saw their startled expressions, and fibbed, “I have a
friend there who will help me.”</p><p>They deposited her at the airport.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>They told her that an eastbound plane was due in twenty minutes. She
bought a ticket. She still had her money; the money they had advanced
when they hired her. It was enough, and some over.</p><p>She waited until a few minutes before the plane was due, then she
telephoned the sheriff.</p><p>“Oh, Mira Lanson,” the sheriff said. “Where the dickens are you? They
say out at the Broken Circle that you didn’t show up yesterday.”</p><p>The girl said, “Some men seized Ben Duck. They are holding him in a
canyon. I think they plan to kill him.” She described the location of
the canyon to the best of her ability. She described such of the men as
she had seen, talking rapidly so that the sheriff could not get in a
word.</p><p>She could hear the plane coming in now, and she knew the sheriff would
not be able to call back in time to stop her.</p><p>“I’m going after Doc Savage,” she finished finally, and hung up.</p><p>She had to run for the plane. She sat in the deeply comfortable seat,
trembling with uneasiness, until the plane motors boomed out and the
craft ran across the field and took to the air. She watched the ground
drop away.</p><p>The next thing, the stewardess was shaking her. She woke up struggling
in fright, but it was only lunch. She ate ravenously, then slept again.</p><p>Later, when she was awake—and intolerably stiff—she analyzed her
behavior. It was hysterical, perhaps. Hasty. And she had been scared.
But, withal, she was satisfied with the course she had taken. She was
going to put the story in the hands of Doc Savage.</p><p>Doc Savage was a mysterious person to her. She had heard of him, of
course, but what she had heard was probably about what other people had
heard. The public, that is. Doc Savage was a figure of mystery, a man
about whose private life even the newspaper columnists could learn
little. It was known that he was an impressive man of great ability,
scientific and physical, whose trade was the strange and Galahadian one
of righting wrongs and punishing evildoers who were outside the law. It
was understood that his headquarters were on the top floor of one of the
city’s major skyscrapers. But no one knew much about those headquarters.</p><p>She would, she decided, pass this story along to Doc Savage. He could do
what he wanted about it.</p><p>She felt sorry over the fate of Ben Duck. She had frankly liked the
young cowboy. His honest qualities had appealed to her. They must have
appealed to her a lot, she thought now. She had risked her life in an
effort to save him. She wondered what had happened to Ben Duck. Growing
in her, now that she could think back more clearly, was a sickening
conviction that Ben had not escaped from that canyon.</p><p>She was a little surprised that the sheriff made no effort to telegraph
ahead and have her taken off the plane.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>But that did not surprise her as much as did the dark–faced man who came
up to her in the lobby of the tall building which housed Doc Savage’s
headquarters. The man wore a uniform. She presumed it was a building
attendant’s uniform, and too late it dawned on her that the uniform was
otherwise. The man was merely wearing the garb to make her think he was
a building attendant.</p><p>She was looking at the building directory in the lobby when he stepped
up behind her and asked, “Looking for Doc Savage?”</p><p>“Oh!” she gasped, and whirled.</p><p>She did not like the man, but he did not give her time for her dislike
to crystallize into something definite enough in the way of suspicion to
save her.</p><p>He said, “Mr. Savage keeps a man in the lobby to inspect people who come
to see him. That is because he has many enemies. I will have to question
you.”</p><p>She hesitated.</p><p>“Over this way,” the man said.</p><p>He took her arm, led her to the right. She did not realize, because she
was unfamiliar with the building, where they were going—until the man
walked her out through a side door.</p><p>Two other men stepped up. One of these showed a gun which he was
covering with a topcoat. He said, “Don’t do any singing, sister.”</p><p>The street was empty, the hour being early, the street a side one.
Overhead somewhere, an airplane buzzed. On Fifth Avenue, big buses
lumbered, and there were a few taxicabs.</p><p>The man with the gun asked, “Anybody see you? Anyone get suspicious?”</p><p>“Naw.” The man in the uniform of a building attendant chuckled. “She was
lookin’ up Doc Savage’s floor number when I spotted her. I give her a
line. She never suspected anything.” He looked at one of the men.
“Where’s the car?”</p><p>“Did you pick up the——”</p><p>“The sack and the weight? Yeah, I got ’em.”</p><p>The way the man sounded, and what he said, suddenly made the girl weak
with terror. Her knees seemed to unhinge, and she could hardly get her
breath. They had to support her.</p><p>Then, mysteriously, they were not supporting her. They were—all three
of them, which was what made it weird—down on the sidewalk. They sank
slowly. They made no outcry. They did not seem in agony. They were no
hand or leg movements, no mouth shapes, that could mean they were in
pain. They seemed to go to sleep on the sidewalk.</p><p>The girl stared at them and became very tired and very comfortable, so
comfortable that she did not mind lying down on the sidewalk; in fact,
she had an overwhelming desire to do so; and she did, and seemed to go
to sleep.</p><p>One thing she did notice before she slept. The figure of a man. A big
man. He had appeared suddenly; she got the idea he had dropped from a
nearby window. But the fantastic thing was that he was the man she had
met on the range near the Broken Circle ranch, the man who had pursued
her horse with such unbelievable stamina.</p></section><footer/></body></html>