<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter 6</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch05.xhtml" title="Chapter 5"/><link rel="next" href="ch07.xhtml" title="Chapter 7"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter 6" epub:type="chapter" id="id520"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter 6</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>The Casey Ancestor</em></h3></div></div></div><p>When she recovered, it was much as if she had awakened from sleep. There
were no bad effects. She looked around. The room was not particularly
large. There were big windows on one side. In front of these an
elaborately inlaid table; a large chair stood against a wall, and there
was comfortable leather furniture.</p><p>In front of her stood the man she had seen down in the street—the man
she had met near the Broken Circle Ranch. His expression was
inscrutable.</p><p>The girl’s first impulse was to leap up. She did so, discovering she
could stand. She retreated until she brought up against the inlaid
table.</p><p>The man’s expression remained enigmatic. He went to a door, and as he
moved, she saw that he was even more of a giant than she had thought.
His white hair, the rather rheumy quality of his blue eyes, the dry
paleness of his face—all signs of age—were not in keeping with the
vibrant alertness of his movements.</p><p>He opened a door. “Monk,” he said.</p><p>The man who came in—Monk—fitted the name, but pleasantly. He was a
grinning simian individual with enormous arms and a round, homely face
that had a big mouth and small twinkling eyes. His clothes were
expensive, but none of the colors were right, the fit was off
everywhere, and the garments looked as if they had been slept in.</p><p>He was trailed by a remarkable–looking pig. The pig had enormous ears
and a snout built for inquiring into things.</p><p>“Monk Mayfair,” the big man introduced.</p><p>The girl’s eyes got round; her lips parted. “Monk—Monk Mayfair. That is
the name of one of Doc Savage’s aides.”</p><p>“That is right.”</p><p>The girl stared at the man she had met on the Broken Circle range. “But
who are you?”</p><p>The man called Monk answered that. “Why, that is Doc. Didn’t you know
that?”</p><p>She shook her head instantly. “Listen, I saw Mr. Savage once, at fairly
close range. I happen to know this man is not—well—Doc Savage has
strange flake–gold eyes. And his skin is a deep bronze.”</p><p>Monk said, “Disguise.”</p><p>The girl sniffed. “You can’t disguise eyes.”</p><p>The big man removed a small rubber suction cup of a device from a
screw–cap metal tube. He applied this to tiny glass caps—nothing more
than the common “invisible” type of eyeglass, but colored blue—and
removed them.</p><p>“Altering the color of the eyes,” he explained quietly, “is not
particularly difficult.”</p><p>The girl studied his face. It had changed. There was power in the
features that she had not noticed before, enhanced by the weird quality
of the eyes, the pupils of which were like pools of flake–gold being
stirred by tiny winds. Those eyes were the things she had remembered
most strongly about this man.</p><p>“You <span class="emphasis"><em>are</em></span> Doc Savage,” she said.</p><p>“We want your story.” Doc Savage’s voice was charged with power,
although not lifted. “All of it.”</p><p>The girl sank in a chair. “My name,” she said, “is Johanna Hickman.
People call me Hicky.”</p><p>“Yes?”</p><p>“I’m an actress. I was broke. A man came to me. He said his name was Ned
Smith. He said he was a detective. He said he wanted to hire me to go to
Wyoming, pretend to be a girl named Mira Lanson, whose uncle had died. I
was to meet a cowboy named Ben Duck, and inveigle him into turning over
to me a little green puzzle of an eagle with some holes in it into which
you shook leaden feathers. He was supposed to have gotten the puzzle
from the uncle who had died. The uncle was named Pilatus Casey. When I
got this puzzle, I was to turn it over to Mr. Smith. I was offered good
pay—twenty–five dollars a day—to do the job, plus expenses. I took the
job.”</p><p>“Then what?”</p><p>“This Ben Duck was too smart for me. He handed me a picture of somebody
else and tricked me into identifying it as my uncle. Mr. Smith was there
in town. He had arrived ahead of me. I told him Ben Duck had tricked me.
Mr. Smith told me to decoy Ben Duck out into the country, and hold him
there until detectives could arrive. Only it wasn’t detectives who came.
It was Mr. Smith’s hired thugs. They seized Ben Duck, took him to a
canyon, were torturing him. In the night, I cut Ben Duck loose, and we
fled—but I don’t think Ben Duck got away.”</p><p>Doc Savage asked slowly, “Is that all you know about this thing?”</p><p>“That,” said Johanna Hickman, “is everything.”</p><p>“Your previous address here in New York City,” Doc Savage requested.</p><p>She gave it to him willingly. “You’ll find I have told you the truth. My
landlady will even remember Mr. Smith calling on me, probably.”</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>After Doc Savage had left the room—he was obviously going to use a
telephone to check the girl’s story—the young woman stared at Monk.
Monk was such a homely fellow that it was easy to be friendly with him.</p><p>She said, “I don’t understand this,” in a bewildered voice. “I met Mr.
Savage on the range near the Broken Circle Ranch. He was riding a Broken
Circle horse.”</p><p>“That’s right,” Monk agreed. “And he followed you to New York. Or
rather, he beat you here.”</p><p>“But I don’t understand how he came to be there on the Wyoming range
night before last, riding a Broken Circle horse.”</p><p>Monk hesitated. Then he got up, went to the door. “Doc,” he called. “It
all right to tell her what you were doing in Wyoming? She’s curious
about that.”</p><p>The answer was evidently in the affirmative, because Monk came back and
said, “It’s simple. A little more than a week ago, Doc got a call for
help from Pilatus Casey.”</p><p>“The old prospector who was found dead?”</p><p>Monk nodded. “Yes. Pilatus Casey wanted Doc to come to Wyoming at once,
and meet him at the Broken Circle Ranch. Old Casey said there was
something big and dangerous brewing. He said that if anything happened
to him, Doc should start looking for this green eagle puzzle. He
described the puzzle fairly well.”</p><p>Monk sighed.</p><p>“To make a long story short,” he continued, “old Pilatus Casey didn’t
tell Doc a lot. He called over the telephone. But Doc became interested.
The thing was goofy—the part about a green eagle puzzle,
particularly—but there was undeniable terror in old Pilatus Casey’s
voice. The old fellow was scared. And Doc had nothing very pressing on
hand at the moment, so he went to Wyoming.”</p><p>“What has he found out?” Johanna Hickman asked curiously.</p><p>Monk shrugged. “Pilatus Casey didn’t show up at the ranch. Doc got tired
of waiting. So he tried to start something. He made a puzzle that was a
little like the one that had been described to him, and planted it on
this cowboy, Ben Duck.”</p><p>“Why do something like that?”</p><p>“Doc figured,” Monk explained, “that someone might try to do something
about the puzzle. They did. Two guys took it away from Ben Duck. Doc
followed the thieves, and watched them hide out in a haystack on the
Broken Circle Ranch. He watched one of the guests, Albert Panzer, bring
food to the two thieves. After the body of Pilatus Casey was found, Doc
watched these two thieves holdup the sheriff and seize Pilatus Casey’s
watch, in an effort to prevent the body being identified. Doc had heard
enough to know that somebody was hiring these guys and Albert Panzer.
Somebody higher up. He was trying to learn who the higher up was, but
the sheriff grabbed Doc.”</p><p>The girl was looking through the window at a forest of skyscrapers. She
was, she knew by now, in Doc Savage’s headquarters on the top floor of
the great midtown building.</p><p>She said, “Mr. Savage broke out of jail.”</p><p>“Yes, and went back to the Broken Circle, to watch and keep under
cover,” Monk said. “Albert Panzer and the two thieves had disappeared.
What he didn’t know until he found you was that they had grabbed Ben
Duck and gone to the canyon.”</p><p>One thing was puzzling the girl. She asked, “Why did Mr. Savage follow
me back here?”</p><p>“To see what we can find out about the mystery from the New York end,”
Monk said.</p><p>She nodded.</p><p>“Pilatus Casey called on Doc Savage for help in a mystery about a green
eagle puzzle,” the girl said, “and now you’re trying to find out what
the mystery is, because Pilatus Casey is dead.”</p><p>“That sketches it,” Monk admitted, “on a thumbnail.”</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>Doc Savage came back into the room. He was accompanied by a man who was
of medium height, with good shoulders, a thin waist—and a remarkable
outfit of apparel. The man was not garishly dressed; he was just
perfectly attired. So perfectly attired that there was no doubt about
the perfection. He carried an innocent–looking black cane.</p><p>“Ham Brooks,” Doc Savage introduced. “The lawyer of our group.”</p><p>Ham Brooks looked at the girl. He looked at Monk. The idea that Monk had
been alone with such a ravishing bit of femininity seemed to irritate
him.</p><p>“Chemistry,” Ham called.</p><p>There came waddling into the room an animal that might have been a
chimpanzee, midget baboon, dwarf ape, or some mysterious species of
simian as yet uncatalogued. The animal was remarkable for the likeness
it bore to the homely Monk.</p><p>“My pet,” Ham explained blandly, indicating the chimp. “Name is
Chemistry. Any resemblance to Monk, here, is purely accidental and
regretted by both myself and Chemistry. No relation, I assure you.”</p><p>Monk glared.</p><p>“This shyster lawyer,” Monk said, “has a——”</p><p>“—wife and seventeen half–witted children,” Ham finished the statement.
“Which is a lie. And a lie quite typical of Monk. He hasn’t much
imagination.”</p><p>Monk became red–necked and silent.</p><p>The girl gathered that the two did not get along any too quietly.</p><p>She thought of something.</p><p>“What about those three men who were—who had just captured me when you
interfered?” she asked.</p><p>Doc said, “We are about to get around to them.” He turned back toward
the door. “Wait a moment, please.”</p><p>He was not gone long, and Johanna Hickman—she had asked Monk and Ham to
call her Hicky, and they had agreed with alacrity—was astounded at the
change in Doc Savage. He had removed his disguise. There had been some
kind of dye on his hair, some coloring material on his skin, and he had
evidently taken these off with chemical removers.</p><p>Doc Savage was a giant of bronze, the metallic color of his skin
probably having come from long exposure to tropical sun. His hair was a
bronze a little darker. His features—there had been wax in his cheeks,
and some metallic device that changed the shape of his nostrils—were
regular and handsome without being too perfect.</p><p>He said, “Come on.” He was carrying a small radio.</p><p>They walked out into the corridor and down a flight of stairs and
through a door.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>The office which they entered was unfurnished. Doc Savage locked the
door.</p><p>The three men who had tried to seize Hicky lay on the floor. They were
not tied in any way, yet they were unable to move. Hicky stared at them,
then realized their arms and legs were useless. The cause of the
uselessness became evident when Doc Savage produced a small hypodermic
needle and a vial of some chemical, and gave each of the prisoners a
fresh dose.</p><p>Monk whispered, “Local anaesthetic,” in Hicky’s ear. “Like the stuff you
get at the dentist’s. Can’t move their muscles.”</p><p>“Can’t they yell, either?” Hicky asked.</p><p>“Notice he’s not giving them a fresh shot in the throat,” Monk pointed
out. “He gave their vocal chords one slug of the local to keep them
quiet. They’ll be able to talk in a few minutes.”</p><p>Monk’s prediction proved correct. Doc Savage kneaded the throats of the
prisoners with his hands, and when they were able to make noises, tied
cloth gags between their jaws.</p><p>“Watch him work,” Monk whispered admiringly to Hicky. “What he’s going
to do is make these guys talk. Watch how he does it.”</p><p>Hicky nodded. She asked, “Down there in the street—what overcame them?
Whatever it was made me unconscious, too. What was it?”</p><p>“An anaesthetic gas,” Monk explained. “Doc puts it up in little
thin–walled glass pellets. It’s invisible and odorless, and becomes
harmless after it mixes with the air for a while. When it hits you, you
don’t know anything about it until all of a sudden—<span class="emphasis"><em>ping!</em></span> You’re
asleep. Leaves no after effects.”</p><p>The girl watched Doc Savage. She had heard that he was an amazing man.
Apparently the reports were not exaggerated.</p><p>Doc plugged the small radio into a wall outlet. He tuned in a broadcast
program, then advanced the volume control as far as it would go. The
program was hillbilly music, raucous, thunderous, full of shouting. Very
good stuff, Hicky realized, to cover any sounds these prisoners should
make if they tried to yell for help.</p><p>The bronze man went over and opened the window. It was a large window.
He looked out and down, remaining there a few minutes.</p><p>Hicky went over to the window. The street was so far below that it was a
little nauseating. There was no ledge, no setback in the sheer side of
the building for at least sixty stories. The girl shivered, drew back.</p><p>Doc Savage went over to one of the prisoners, removed the gag.</p><p>“All we want,” the bronze man said, “is a complete story of what you
know about this thing.”</p><p>The man—he was the one who had shown the gun to Hicky—peeled his lips
off his teeth. “You know where you can go,” he said, and added some
obscenity.</p><p>Doc Savage’s voice took on a grim, rumbling quality.</p><p>He said, “Unfortunately, we do not have much time to waste on you.”</p><p>The prisoner skinned his teeth again, got rid of more profanity. The
little radio was making a terrific racket in the room. They had to shout
at each other.</p><p>Doc Savage removed the gags from the jaws of the other men. He tried to
get them to answer questions. They refused, one of them bluntly, the
uniformed one after a moment’s hesitation.</p><p>“Keep your traps shut!” the first captive shrilled at them.</p><p>Ham Brooks strode over to the prisoners. Ham twisted at the handle of
his dark cane, jerked, and it became evident that the implement was a
sword cane. The blade was long and brightly dancing, the tip coated with
a sticky substance that was evidently some kind of chemical to enhance
the effect of the blade.</p><p>“Talking,” Ham said violently, “is the only chance you birds have.”</p><p>The spokesman sneered at him. “You ain’t puttin’ anything over, bud. We
can take anything you put out, up to a killing. And it happens we know
you got the reputation of never killing anybody.”</p><p>Doc Savage asked grimly. “What gave you the idea we never kill anybody?”</p><p>The man sneered at him. “I been around.”</p><p>The words seemed to infuriate Doc Savage. The bronze man seized the
prisoner, hauled him over to the window, and jammed him down on the
sill, half outside. The man looked down. He became somewhat sick of
expression. But his courage held, and he snarled, “This kind of bluff
won’t get you anywhere.”</p><p>“You think it’s bluff?” Doc Savage asked ominously.</p><p>“Hell, yes.”</p><p>The prisoner screamed then. His scream lifted even above the blatting of
the radio. He made frantic efforts, pawing with his numbed useless arms
at the window sill, breaking his fingernails and skinning his wrists in
his effort to hang on, spray flying off his lips from the force of his
crying out in horror, trying to hook his chin over the sill to save
himself, but falling and slipping off into space.</p><p>The girl screamed then.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>Monk leaped and caught the girl—depend on Monk to do that—and she was
pale and tense in his arms. The look she gave Doc Savage was ghastly.</p><p>The bronze man did not seem concerned. He looked out of the window,
downward after the falling body, then drew back. “With hundreds of
windows on this side of the building,” he remarked, “it is not likely
the police will spot the one from which the body fell.”</p><p>He walked over to another of the captives, eyed them, then glanced at
Ham. “In fact, if we dumped all of them out of the window, it would be a
quick easy disposal,” he said.</p><p>The prisoner who was wearing the uniform looked as if he was going to
faint. The other was clenching his teeth and a little saliva was leaking
from the left corner of his mouth.</p><p>“You want to tell us what you know?” Doc asked.</p><p>They were silent.</p><p>The bronze man said, “Well, we cannot waste time,” and clutched the
uniformed captive by the shoulders, started to drag him toward the
window.</p><p>“Wait!” the man screamed suddenly. “I wasn’t gonna hurt that girl! We
was just hired to keep her outa sight for a while!”</p><p>“Who hired you?” Doc asked.</p><p>“He said his name was Smith.” The man became paler. “Bless me, chief,
I’m telling you the truth. He said his name was Smith.”</p><p>“Describe him.”</p><p>The man described a person who was about five feet eight, dark, cast in
the left eye, liked loud ties and socks, had a set of scarred left
knuckles.</p><p>Doc turned to the girl. “That your Mr. Smith?”</p><p>Hicky was looking at the window, her eyes magnetized by horror. Doc had
to repeat his question. She nodded. “Yes, that answers the description
of the man who hired me,” she said.</p><p>The prisoner looked infinitely relieved. He wiped his forehead with a
numbed arm, having trouble doing the job. “I’m not lyin’ to you,” he
reiterated.</p><p>Doc was grim. “You will have to tell us more than that, if you expect to
get out of this,” he said ominously.</p><p>The man said, “Brother, I can tell you more. Here was the original
set–up. There was an old man named Sebastian Casey——”</p><p>Monk said, “You mean Pilatus Casey, don’t you?”</p><p>“I mean Sebastian Casey,” the prisoner corrected. “Pilatus Casey was his
son, although he was past sixty years old. There was this old Sebastian
Casey and his son Pilatus, and Pilatus had a niece named Mira Lanson,
who was his sister’s daughter. The sister had died a long time ago. The
two old men and this girl were the only members of the Casey family who
were living. Then there was a young fellow named Hubert Brackenridge, a
young dentist, who was the family friend.”</p><p>“What’s the family history got to do with it?” Monk asked.</p><p>“I’ll show you in a minute. About a month ago, old grandfather Sebastian
Casey gets the mumps and dies. He was past eighty, but he got the mumps
anyway, and he dies. But before he dies, he calls in Pilatus Casey and
this family friend, Hubert Brackenridge, and he tells them something.”</p><p>“What’d he tell ’em?” Monk demanded.</p><p>“I don’t know,” the prisoner said. “But whatever it was, hell broke
loose. Somebody took a shot at old Pilatus Casey, and missed. Then
somebody tried to kidnap him, but that failed, too. Then Pilatus Casey
lit out for Wyoming. And Hubert Brackenridge was killed.”</p><p>“This family friend, Hubert Brackenridge, was murdered?”</p><p>“I didn’t say murdered. I said killed.”</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>Doc Savage contemplated the captive narrowly. The man was scared badly
enough to be telling the truth. “How did the so–called killing happen?”</p><p>“Automobile accident. Car went over the edge of a road into a deep ditch
and caught fire. Hubert Brackenridge’s neck was broke and he was smashed
up.” The captive eyed them, then shrugged. “I don’t know whether Hubert
Brackenridge was murdered, or whether it was an accident.”</p><p>Doc Savage said, “It seems that as soon as old Sebastian Casey died,
someone made attempts on the lives of Pilatus Casey and the family
friend, Hubert Brackenridge. Is that right?”</p><p>“Yes,” said the captive, “that’s right.”</p><p>“Why?”</p><p>“Eh?”</p><p>“Why?” Doc’s flake–gold eyes were intense. “What is behind it?”</p><p>“I don’t know.”</p><p>The bronze man’s eyes bore on the captive in a way that made the fellow
squirm and dabble at his forehead with a numb hand.</p><p>“Honest, I don’t know,” the man said wildly.</p><p>“Who are you working for?”</p><p>“That guy Smith hired us,” the man said, “but I understand he’s gone to
Wyoming. I don’t think Smith was the head guy, though. The orders come
from somebody else. I don’t know who. I think Smith might know, but I
ain’t sure.”</p><p>“Whoever is behind the trouble,” Doc suggested, “is trying to keep under
cover?”</p><p>“That’s the idea,” the man said. “Say, what are you gonna do with me?”</p><p>“Ask you some more questions. What about the real niece of Pilatus
Casey—the genuine Mira Lanson. What about her?”</p><p>“I don’t know anything about her.”</p><p>“Was there any attempt made to kill or kidnap her?”</p><p>“Not that I know of.”</p><p>“What else do you know?”</p><p>“Nothing,” the man said. “I really don’t. My name is Leo Marticer, and
my pal here is Chuck North, and the guy you”—the man
shuddered—“chucked out of the window was Tony Parst. We have worked
together for a long time.”</p><p>Doc said, “Pulled a lot of jobs together, eh?”</p><p>“Well—yes,” the man admitted uncomfortably.</p><p>Doc Savage produced another hypodermic needle, a different one than he
had used for the local anaesthetic—this one was larger—and
administered a coffee–colored drug.</p><p>Monk, for the benefit of Hicky, explained, “That’s just a stronger
anaesthetic, a general one. It will keep these guys drugged and helpless
for a couple of days.”</p><p>“What will you do with the prisoners?” the girl asked.</p><p>Monk opened his mouth, then shut it. He couldn’t very well explain. Monk
knew that Doc would consign the captives to the place they called the
“college,” but Monk also knew that the existence of the “college” was a
secret. It was an unusual institution where the students underwent
delicate brain operations which wiped out all memory of the past, after
which they were trained as good citizens and taught a trade.</p><p>“Oh, the prisoners will be all right,” Monk said evasively.</p><p>Doc Savage, having finished administering the general anaesthetic,
straightened, said, “We will bring up the other one.”</p><p>The bronze man went down to the floor below, to an office immediately
under the one where the questioning had taken place. The office was a
large one, occupied by two men.</p><p>Doc Savage introduced the two men.</p><p>“Renny Renwick,” he said, “and Johnny Littlejohn. Two of our
associates.”</p><p>Renny Renwick, who was an eminent engineer, had a long puritanical face
and fists which would hardly have gone inside gallon pails. He was very
big, almost as large as Doc Savage.</p><p>Johnny Littlejohn was longer and thinner than it seemed any man could be
and survive. His clothes fitted him like a tent on a pole. A monocle was
attached to his lapel by a ribbon, and the monocle was obviously a
magnifier.</p><p>“I’ll be superamalgamated,” he remarked, seeing Hicky for the first
time.</p><p>There were two spliced timbers in the room, and an arrangement whereby
they had been thrust from the window and braced against the ceiling.
There was also an ample net of the type used by building contractors as
a safety measure when men are working in high places.</p><p>The man Doc Savage had thrown from the window above was sitting on the
floor. He was unharmed, except that he was bound hand and foot.</p><p>“Oh!” Hicky was astounded.</p><p>Monk grinned. “Renny and Johnny, here, just stuck that net out of the
window and caught the fellow.”</p><p>“But I didn’t see any net when I looked down,” the girl said.</p><p>“Neither did this guy,” Monk said, indicating the bound prisoner. “They
put the net out when Doc signaled.”</p><p>The bronze man hauled the captive upstairs and placed him with the other
two, then administered a general anaesthetic. He made a telephone call.
That afternoon, an ambulance would call for the three prisoners, and
take them on the long run north to the “college.”</p><p>“In the meantime,” Doc said quietly, “We will investigate the real Mira
Lanson. And the death of this Hubert Brackenridge.”</p></section><footer/></body></html>