<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter 7</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch06.xhtml" title="Chapter 6"/><link rel="next" href="ch08.xhtml" title="Chapter 8"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter 7" epub:type="chapter" id="id540"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter 7</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>Ignorance and Death</em></h3></div></div></div><p>They found Mira Lanson through the undertaker who had buried Sebastian
Casey. She was not in the telephone book. Nor was she in the city
directory.</p><p>“Really,” she said, lifting her eyebrows and the end of her nose, “I
find an unregistered telephone avoids annoyance.”</p><p>The lifted eyebrows and the lifted nose gave a line on her character.
That, and the way she rolled her broad A’s. She called it, “rawly.”</p><p>Her form ran a little too much to bones. The art work on her face was
overdone. She was smoking a cigarette, and it was in a foot–long holder.</p><p>“It would have made it more convenient for us to find you if you had a
listed telephone,” Doc Savage said. “May we come in?”</p><p>“I don’t see why you should come in,” she said.</p><p>“It’s about your uncle, Pilatus Casey.”</p><p>“Really”—she called it “rawly” again—“I can think of no reason why I
should be interested in Uncle Pilatus.”</p><p>“He’s dead,” Doc said.</p><p>She drew smoke through the long holder. The smoke leaving her lips was
still blue.</p><p>“Is he?” she said. “How interesting.”</p><p>She stepped back then, and let them in, but it might have been because
she had taken a second look at Doc Savage. The sight of the bronze man’s
size and handsomeness, Renny reflected, made her act like a cat that had
seen cream. Renny was a skeptic where women were concerned. This one
reminded him of a skinny blond panther.</p><p>Doc said, “We were wondering if you would have any objections to talking
about Sebastian Casey and Pilatus Casey.”</p><p>She curved her red lips at him. “Why should I object?”</p><p>“Sebastian Casey was grandfather?”</p><p>“Yes.” She shrugged. “Really, one can’t help one’s grandfather, can
they?”</p><p>“I take it,” Doc said quietly, “that you didn’t like him?”</p><p>She patted a spot on the davenport for him to sit down. “It wasn’t that
way, exactly. The contrary, I should say. He didn’t like me.”</p><p>“Can you tell us anything about him?”</p><p>“He was a quarrelsome old man. I haven’t seen him half a dozen times in
the last ten years.” She looked up coyly and added, “Not since I was a
child.”</p><p>“Did you know that Sebastian Casey made a statement of some kind to
Pilatus Casey and Hubert Brackenridge?”</p><p>“I heard of some such statement.”</p><p>“Do you know the text of the statement?”</p><p>“No.”</p><p>“Were you present when it was made?”</p><p>“I was in the house. I was not present in the room.”</p><p>“Then you knew Hubert Brackenridge?”</p><p>“Naturally.”</p><p>“Did you know him very well?”</p><p>She used the fingertips of her right hand to fluff her hair.</p><p>“Ah—quite well,” she said, and dropped her eyes.</p><p>“Has it ever occurred to you,” Doc Savage asked, “that there was
anything strange about Hubert Brackenridge’s death?”</p><p>“What?” She stared at him. “That’s ridiculous. He—he had an accident.
His car missed the road and went into a ditch.”</p><p>“That is what we were told,” Doc agreed enigmatically. He changed the
subject. “It is very kind of you to give us your time. I do not think we
will bother you much more, except for one question.”</p><p>“Yes?” she seemed uneasy.</p><p>“Have you,” Doc asked, “ever seen or heard of a little toy puzzle
consisting of a green eagle perforated with some holes into which you
shake leaden feathers?”</p><p>“No.”</p><p>“Never heard Sebastian Casey or Pilatus Casey mention it?”</p><p>“No.”</p><p>“What about Hubert Brackenridge?”</p><p>“No.”</p><p>Doc Savage arose and said politely that he was grateful for what
information she had been able to give him, and that he and the others
would be going. They left by the door, the bronze man being the last one
to depart.</p><p>Mira Lanson reached out suddenly and clutched his sleeve with red–nailed
fingers. “What makes you think Hubert Brackenridge’s death wasn’t an
accident?” she demanded tensely.</p><p>“Thank you again,” Doc Savage said, “for telling us all you knew.”</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>Hicky eyed the bronze man when they were in the street. “That woman,”
said Hicky, “didn’t tell you all she knew. Not by a long shot.”</p><p>“What makes you think so?”</p><p>“I know women. That’s why. That woman is a deceitful hussy.”</p><p>“She made me think of a hungry blond panther,” Renny said.</p><p>“Oh, I don’t know,” Monk told him. “You fatten her up a little, and she
wouldn’t be bad.”</p><p>“Not bad to look at, maybe,” Hicky said. “But bad inside.”</p><p>“That,” Ham said, “would make her Monk’s kind of gal.”</p><p>Monk scowled at him.</p><p>They walked to the end of the block, where they had been forced to park
their car. The street was crowded. When they reached the machine, Doc
got behind the wheel. He drove around the corner, and stopped.</p><p>“Monk, you and Ham go back and watch Mira Lanson,” Doc directed. “One of
you take the front of the place, and the other the back. Get Long Tom
Roberts on the telephone and have him hurry over and tap the woman’s
telephone line.”</p><p>“Right,” Monk said.</p><p>He and Ham got out of the machine.</p><p>Doc Savage handed each of them a small device not much larger than a box
of full–sized kitchen matches. These were tiny portable radio
transmitter–receiver combinations. Operating on very short waves, they
were efficient only for horizon distances.</p><p>“Keep in continuous touch with us, and with each other,” Doc advised.</p><p>“Right.”</p><p>The bronze man drove a few blocks, and stopped at a drugstore to use a
telephone. The bureau of vital statistics of the city furnished him with
the name of the undertaker who had handled the funeral of Hubert
Brackenridge, and the department of the State police devoted to traffic
accidents was able to give him the exact spot—in this case, they
furnished him with the name of a trooper who had covered the
Brackenridge death—where the accident had occurred.</p><p>“I take it,” said Hicky, “that you are going to investigate this car
death of Hubert Brackenridge?”</p><p>Doc Savage nodded.</p><p>“Holy cow!” said big–fisted Renny. “Do you suppose Hubert Brackenridge’s
death was really a murder?”</p><p>The bronze man made no comment.</p><p>Forty–five minutes later, they had picked up the State police trooper
who had been first to reach the scene of Hubert Brackenridge’s accident.</p><p>He took them to the spot. It was a country lane, so deserted that during
the time they were there, which was about thirty minutes, only one car
passed the spot, and that was a station wagon with a bright–varnished
body and yellow wheels.</p><p>Faint traces of the accident remained—a slight rut angling off the
road, a newly repaired guard fence, and a burned area in the bottom of a
deep ditch.</p><p>“The car burned after it hit?” Doc asked.</p><p>“Yes. A terrific fire.”</p><p>Renny, suddenly suspicious, rumbled, “Was the body burned until it was
hard to identify, by any chance?”</p><p>“Oh, no. It was easily identified,” the officer assured him.</p><p>Doc asked, “Who made the identification?”</p><p>“Two of his business associates.”</p><p>“Hubert Brackenridge was a dentist, wasn’t he?”</p><p>“Yes. The men who identified him were in the dental business in the same
building. Their names were Dimers and Stein. They identified the body
while it was lying right here.”</p><p>After he had gone over the vicinity, Doc Savage dropped the State
trooper at the station. The bronze man and the others drove back to the
city.</p><p>“It looked like an ordinary accident,” Renny said. “Of course, someone
could have knocked Hubert Brackenridge on the head and run his car off
that curve. But, again, it was a bad curve and could have been an
accident.”</p><p>Doc Savage made no comment. He pulled up suddenly before an office
building in the suburban district.</p><p>“What’s this?” Renny asked.</p><p>“The building where Hubert Brackenridge practiced dentistry,” Doc
explained. “Renny, would you mind going in and seeing if Dimers and
Stein, the two dentists who identified Brackenridge’s body, are here.
Ask them if they identified it.”</p><p>Renny entered the building. He was not gone long. He came back and
reported, “Both of them here. Both of them said it was Hubert
Brackenridge, all right. They went to the undertaker’s place and looked
at it, and they were sure.”</p><p>“The undertaker’s place?” Doc asked.</p><p>“Sure.” Then Renny’s jaw fell. “Say! Wait a minute! Didn’t that State
trooper say they identified the body at the scene of the accident?”</p><p>Doc said, “You better go back and ask and be sure about that.”</p><p>Renny returned to consult the two dentists about where they had
identified the body.</p><p>He reported, “It was the morgue. They were never at the accident scene.”</p><p>“That is unusual,” Doc said.</p><p>“Possibly the State trooper made a slip of the tongue,” the girl
suggested.</p><p>There were trees in the cemetery that needed trimming, and the grass was
dead in patches. The caretakers had not taken away flowers from the
graves when they had faded. The effect of the whole place was elderly,
and its slovenly appearance, instead of being depressing, was rather
pleasantly lazy.</p><p>Doc Savage said, “This is the cemetery where Hubert Brackenridge’s body
was interred. It seems there is a Brackenridge family tomb. The body was
placed in that.”</p><p>The keeper of the cemetery—the head keeper—had a map showing the
location of the Brackenridge mausoleum. Doc noted the position, then set
out.</p><p>The bronze man had not gone far when he stopped suddenly.</p><p>“Take a look.” He pointed.</p><p>A station wagon was swinging out of the cemetery, following a winding
road and moving at good speed. It was an average–looking station wagon,
except that it had yellow wheels in addition to a brightly–varnished
body.</p><p>“Holy cow!” Renny exploded. “That’s the same station wagon that passed
us on that road where Hubert Brackenridge’s car went into the ditch.”</p><p>Hicky exclaimed, “There’s something strange about that!”</p><p>Doc Savage, saying nothing, began to run. He went with long strides
toward the Brackenridge tomb—there was no chance of overhauling the
station wagon—which was a block–shaped mass of dark stone interlaced
with white marble.</p><p>A man lay sprawled out beside the door. He was dark, swarthy, grimy,
wore overalls. A wheelbarrow and a garden rake nearby were obviously
part of his equipment.</p><p>“One of the ground attendants,” Hicky said needlessly. “He has been
slugged.”</p><p>Doc Savage bent over the unconscious man.</p><p>Renny rumbled, “I’ll get a description of that station wagon to the
police!” and dashed away, big fists swinging. Johnny made a circle of
the tomb vicinity, then went over and tried the gatelike outer doors of
the tomb itself. They were open. He looked down and pushed pieces of
metal around with a toe. Fragments of the lock.</p><p>He went into the tomb. He was gone for some time.</p><p>Renny came back, rumbling, “I got the cops on the tail of that station
wagon.”</p><p>The attendant’s mouth twisted and he made mumblings and finally his eyes
opened and rolled. “They got the body,” he mumbled.</p><p>Johnny came out of the tomb. Johnny ordinarily did not make any
statement that required him to use small words. But now he was startled
into using small ones.</p><p>“They stole Hubert Brackenridge’s body,” he said.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>After the attendant had revived sufficiently to get to his feet and
stumble off toward the caretaker’s building to report the ghoulish raid,
Doc Savage and the others went back to their car. There did not seem to
be anything more they could do.</p><p>Hicky wrinkled her forehead. “This is strange. Hubert Brackenridge’s
body is important in some way. Those men—whoever they are in the
station wagon—were obviously following us.”</p><p>Johnny started, looked at Doc Savage, asked, “Were they trailing us,
Doc?”</p><p>“Not trailing us,” the bronze man said positively. “They were smoother
than that. They were probably checking the scene of the accident to see
if we were investigating—they no doubt drove by periodically to examine
the spot. As soon as they saw we were investigating, they beat us to the
cemetery and got the body.”</p><p>“But why?” Hicky demanded.</p><p>Doc Savage seemed not to hear the question.</p><p>The young woman looked so irritated at Doc’s silence that Renny smiled
slightly. He knew that Doc had a small habit of appearing not to hear
questions which he did not wish to answer.</p><p>“Probably,” Renny said dryly, “they murdered Hubert Brackenridge. And
wanted to prevent us finding out that he was murdered.”</p><p>“That <span class="emphasis"><em>would</em></span> account for it,” Hicky admitted.</p><p>The car rolled on to the main boulevard, and suddenly the radio burst
into life. Monk’s voice came out of the transmitter, and it was
strained.</p><p>“Doc!” Monk croaked. “Get over to Mira Lanson’s apartment house as quick
as you can.”</p><p>Renny grabbed the microphone, demanded, “Monk, what’s happened?”</p><p>“You get over here quick,” Monk said.</p><p>“Is Ham all right?” Renny demanded.</p><p>“No, he isn’t,” Monk said.</p><p>Doc Savage tramped down heavily on the accelerator, and their car began
to make a noise like a deep–throated foghorn blowing softly. Doc touched
a button, and a siren under the hood began to howl. Red warning lights
glowed on the bumpers. It seemed a remarkably short time—possibly
because the passengers had involuntarily held their breaths part of the
trip—before Doc rolled the machine into a side street.</p><p>Monk dashed out to meet them.</p><p>With Monk was a thin man of hardly average height who had a remarkably
mushroom–like complexion. He was Major Thomas J. Long Tom Roberts, and
despite the fact that he looked like a hopeful prospect for an
undertaker, his health was amazingly good, almost as good as his
fighting ability. He was conceded to be one of the world’s great
electrical wizards.</p><p>Monk did the talking.</p><p>“Trouble hit us without warning,” the homely chemist explained. “We were
watching this Mira Lanson, and nothing suspicious had happened, so there
was no warning.”</p><p>“I was out back putting a tap on the telephone,” Long Tom put in.</p><p>“And I was on the roof of the building next door,” Monk said, “rigging a
spot where we could watch the front of the house without being seen.”</p><p>“Holy cow!” Renny exclaimed. “Cut out the preliminary talk and tell us
what happened.”</p><p>“A station wagon drove up, and four men got out,” Monk said. “The four
rushed in and seized Mira Lanson. They dragged her out, threw her in the
station wagon and drove off. That’s the last we saw of them.”</p><p>“What about Ham?” Renny asked.</p><p>“Ham disappeared,” Monk said. “I think them raiders grabbed him, rapped
him on the head, and threw him in the station wagon. I think they
carried him off.”</p><p>Hicky asked thoughtfully, “Did this station wagon have yellow wheels?”</p><p>“How’d you know that?” Monk stared at her.</p><p>Doc Savage asked, “Wasn’t it possible to follow the station wagon?”</p><p>Monk shrugged. “It got away too fast.”</p><p>The bronze man’s metallic face was thoughtful for a time. “Was there,”
he asked finally, “any chance that Mira Lanson went with them
willingly?”</p><p>“It looked like they captured her,” Monk insisted. “She sure didn’t seem
willing.”</p><p>“Could she have been pretending to be unwilling?”</p><p>“I don’t know,” Monk said.</p><p>“I’ll bet she was pretending,” said Hicky.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>Two other things happened immediately. First, the police called—they
simply cut their radio transmitter in on the frequency Doc Savage was
using, in order to communicate with him—and informed him that the
station wagon with the yellow wheels had been found.</p><p>When located, the station wagon had been drenched with gasoline and in
flames. It was burning furiously. There was a body inside.</p><p>Doc said, “Monk, Renny, Johnny, you take the car and dash over there and
look at the body.”</p><p>Monk’s face was stark. “Maybe—maybe it’s Ham,” he said, horror cramping
the words in his throat.</p><p>Monk, Renny and Johnny departed in the car. Doc Savage, with Long Tom
and Hicky, entered the apartment of Mira Lanson.</p><p>Long Tom Roberts smiled emaciated approval of Hicky, which was
surprising. Long Tom ordinarily did not approve of women. Women were
trouble, he usually insisted, whether they were pretty or homely, long
or short, thin or wide, brunette, red–headed or blonde. He rarely had a
date, possibly because he was sensitive about looking as if he had one
foot in the grave.</p><p>“I imagine,” Long Tom told Hicky, “that Doc would let you drop out of
this any time you wish. After all, there is liable to be some danger.”</p><p>Hicky said, “I’m going to stick until we get the cowboy, Ben Duck, out
of trouble.”</p><p>“Oh,” said Long Tom. “It’s Ben Duck.” He looked a little sour.</p><p>Doc Savage went over Mira Lanson’s apartment. He found the kind of stuff
that a woman living alone would have around her place. The stuff was
expensive.</p><p>In the bathroom, there were three burned matches in a wastebasket. The
washbowl was a little dark. And there was some soot–staining on one of
the neat little green towels.</p><p>“Looks as if she might have burned something recently,” the bronze man
remarked.</p><p>Doc continued his search without making more comment, until he came to
the telephone. He started to pick the instrument from its hook, then
withdrew his hand.</p><p>“Where do those wires go?” he asked grimly.</p><p>Long Tom examined the wires. There were two of them; they were as thin
as hairs; only the unusual sharpness of the bronze man’s vision had
enabled him to see them. They were draped over the receiver hook in such
a way that, had he lifted the receiver, they would have been separated.</p><p>The wires led down and into a drawer of the desk. Long Tom carefully
tied a string to the drawer handle, and they got in the adjoining room
and pulled the drawer open from the safety of that distance. Then they
went back and looked in the drawer.</p><p>The bomb was flat, not much over three inches thick, but it was a foot
wide and more than that in length.</p><p>Long Tom said, “Nice little trap. Those wires are together so that they
make a circuit and hold a relay closed. If you had lifted the receiver,
the wires would have fallen apart, broken the circuit, and the relay
would have opened, causing this thing to go off.”</p><p>Doc carefully took the bomb apart. It held enough nitroglycerin to have
killed everyone in the room.</p><p>Long Tom looked at Hicky. “I told you there might be danger.”</p><p>Hicky managed to smile. “I’m sticking with you,” she said. She looked at
the bronze man. “Mr. Savage, do you think Mira Lanson set that bomb trap
for you?”</p><p>Doc shook his head. “The trap has been set several hours. Since before
we began investigating Miss Lanson.”</p><p>“How do you know?”</p><p>The bronze man indicated a small globule of chewing gum which had been
used to affix the fine wires to the wood of the desk drawer and the
under side of the desk where they led to the telephone receiver.</p><p>“The chewing gum is dry,” he pointed out. “It would take some time for
it to dry.”</p><p>The telephone rang suddenly. Doc picked up the instrument.</p><p>“This is Ham,” the voice of Ham Brooks said quietly.</p><p>“Where are you?”</p><p>“At the Pine Valley Airport in New Jersey. Can you get out here?”</p><p>Doc Savage said, “Yes, we can. What do you want me to do with Elmer?”</p><p>“You can tie ribbons on Elmer,” Ham said.</p></section><footer/></body></html>