<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter 8</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch07.xhtml" title="Chapter 7"/><link rel="next" href="ch09.xhtml" title="Chapter 9"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter 8" epub:type="chapter" id="id560"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter 8</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>Cargo West</em></h3></div></div></div><p>When they were in a car—they were using Long Tom’s private limousine,
which was so ancient that it had probably been called a horseless
carriage when constructed—Hicky looked at Doc Savage thoughtfully.</p><p>“Who is Elmer?” she asked.</p><p>Long Tom answered that “Elmer,” he said, “is a handy fellow to have
around.”</p><p>“I don’t understand.”</p><p>“When Doc asked what he should do with Elmer,” the electrical wizard
explained, “he was using a code. He was actually asking Ham if the
telephone call was on the up–and–up.”</p><p>“And what if the call had not been on the up–and–up?” Hicky asked.</p><p>“Ham would have said to leave Elmer behind, probably. If Ham had said
anything except to tie a ribbon on Elmer, it would have meant there was
trouble.”</p><p>“Oh!” Hicky’s mouth was open. “You think of everything, don’t you?”</p><p>“Unfortunately,” Doc Savage put in dryly, “there is a great deal that we
do not think of. That is why we have so much trouble.”</p><p>Hicky smiled. “From what I’ve heard, other people have all the trouble
when they start fooling with you.”</p><p>Doc Savage wheeled the car carefully through a traffic jam. Despite the
decrepit nature of the vehicle, the bronze man seemed to be able to get
more out of it than its owner, which was why he happened to be driving.</p><p>Doc said, “See if you can contact Monk, Renny and Johnny.”</p><p>The system of radio communication by which the bronze man kept in touch
with his associates while they were working was a thorough one. The
apparatus, while small, was efficient. And each man was fully equipped
with a two–way radio.</p><p>Long Tom got Monk on the radio and said, “Listen, Monk, Ham is alive.”</p><p>Monk was silent for a long time. Evidently he was afraid Ham might be
listening, and was trying to control his delight. Monk would have
practically chopped off an arm before he would let Ham think that he,
Monk, was in the least concerned over what might have happened to him.</p><p>“The overdressed shyster!” Monk said finally. “Probably ran off
deliberately! I’ll kick his teeth in for being such a bother.”</p><p>Long Tom asked, “What about the body they found burning in that station
wagon?”</p><p>“We got here,” Monk said, “and the police still hadn’t managed to put
out the fire.”</p><p>“Whose body was it?”</p><p>“Whoever set fire to that station wagon,” Monk said, “had loaded a bunch
of five–gallon gasoline cans in the back, and they kept blowing up and
burning, so that the body was almost completely consumed.”</p><p>“Then you weren’t able to identify it?”</p><p>“I didn’t say that,” Monk said.</p><p>“Well,” Long Tom yelled, “who was it?”</p><p>“It was the embalmed body of Hubert Brackenridge that they burned,” Monk
snapped. “I’m sure of that, too. It had been embalmed, and it had been
dead for some time, and the undertaker who buried Hubert Brackenridge
identified what was left of it as the body he buried.”</p><p>Doc Savage took the microphone. “The undertaker is sure it was the same
body he buried?”</p><p>“Yes.”</p><p>Doc said, “How soon can you get out to Pine Valley Airport in New
Jersey?”</p><p>“By plane?” Monk asked.</p><p>“Yes,” Doc said. “Stop by headquarters and pick up one of our planes.
Better take a fast one that is still maneuverable enough to land and
take off from small fields.”</p><p>“In other words, don’t take one of those superspeed ships?”</p><p>“That is right.”</p><p>“It will take us half an hour or more to drive back to headquarters,”
Monk said. “After that, we can fly the plane to the airport in a matter
of minutes.”</p><p>“Do that.”</p><p>“You want us to come down boldly on the airport and land?”</p><p>“Unless we decide differently.”</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>Pine Valley Airport was a private field used by light–plane owners for
the most part. There were two hangars of sheet metal, both new, built
since the sudden interest in aviation that had followed governmental
interest in training pilots. There was low woodland on three sides of
the field, a concrete highway running along the fourth edge.</p><p>Nearing the field, Doc slowed speed.</p><p>Hicky asked, “Why did those men seize Hubert Brackenridge’s body and
burn it?”</p><p>Doc Savage seemed not to hear her.</p><p>“What,” asked Hicky, “could Hubert Brackenridge have known about the
mystery that might have led them to murder him in the first place?”</p><p>Long Tom said, “He was present when old Sebastian Casey made some kind
of a dying statement. Pilatus Casey and Hubert Brackenridge both heard
Sebastian Casey’s statement.”</p><p>“And now they’re both dead.”</p><p>“Yes,” said Long Tom. “I don’t think Hubert Brackenridge died an
accidental death, either.”</p><p>“Maybe they seized the body and burned it,” Hicky said, “to cover up
evidence that Hubert Brackenridge was murdered.”</p><p>“Maybe.”</p><p>“What,” asked Hicky, “does the green eagle puzzle mean?”</p><p>“Don’t give me a headache,” Long Tom muttered.</p><p>They were nearly thrown off the seats when Doc Savage stopped the old
car suddenly.</p><p>Ham Brooks had come out of the brush alongside the road, and was waving
at them. He ran to the machine, said, “You better pull off into the
brush over here. There’s a lane. I figured you would come this way, so I
came down here to head you off.”</p><p>Ham was still dapper, except for a rip in one leg of his trousers. He
was carrying his innocent–looking black cane, and there was nothing
outwardly about the implement to show that it was a sword cane.</p><p>“What happened to you?” Long Tom asked him, as soon as Doc Savage had
driven the old car into the brush and parked it where it was out of
sight of the road.</p><p>Ham said, “When those guys came to Mira Lanson’s apartment and grabbed
her, they were in two cars. There was that station wagon with the yellow
wheels, and there was a coupe they were using.”</p><p>“We didn’t see any coupe,” Long Tom exclaimed.</p><p>“I know you didn’t. I was the only one who saw it. I saw the driver and
another guy with him get out and take up a position as lookouts. They
left their coupe parked where they couldn’t see it. So I got in the
baggage compartment.”</p><p>“Didn’t they find you?”</p><p>“No.”</p><p>“What if they had?”</p><p>Ham grinned without humor, and pulled out a small weapon which resembled
an overgrown automatic pistol. It was a machine pistol, perfected by Doc
Savage, and could fire hundreds of cartridges a minute. It discharged
mercy bullets producing unconsciousness, explosive slugs, smoke pellets,
at will.</p><p>“I almost wish they had found me,” Ham said.</p><p>“Where did they go?”</p><p>“They drove up north,” Ham said. “I think, judging from what I could
overhear, that they put a lot of gasoline in the station wagon, and set
it afire. I don’t know why they did that.”</p><p>“They were destroying a body,” Long Tom said.</p><p>“Whose body?”</p><p>“Hubert Brackenridge’s. And don’t ask me why. We haven’t figured it out.
Unless they were trying to hide evidence that Hubert Brackenridge was
murdered.”</p><p>“I don’t think that is why they did it,” Ham said.</p><p>“Why not?”</p><p>“They would know that stealing the body and burning it would be sure to
make the police suspect that something like murder had happened to
Hubert Brackenridge.”</p><p>Doc Savage looked at Ham thoughtfully. “That is a good piece of
reasoning,” he said.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>Ham Brooks waved one expensively gloved hand. “Those guys,” he said,
“are over at the airport.”</p><p>“What are they doing?” Doc asked.</p><p>“They’ve hired a plane,” Ham explained. “They’re waiting for it to show
up.”</p><p>“Where did you find that out?”</p><p>“I got hold of one of the guys at the airport,” Ham said. “They are
young fellows running the place. They didn’t have any large ships
capable of long–distance flights, which is what these fellows want. So
they telephoned to a Long Island airport for them, and the ship is going
to be here”—Ham consulted his watch—“in about twenty minutes. There
was a delay while the pilot got to this Long Island airport, so he could
fly the ship over.”</p><p>The dapper lawyer looked at Doc Savage intently. He seemed to have a
good idea of what the bronze man would do next.</p><p>Doc asked, “These men are hiring ship <span class="emphasis"><em>and</em></span> pilot?”</p><p>“Yes.”</p><p>“Good,” Doc Savage said. He switched on the radio–telephone transmitter
in the car and began calling. “Monk, Renny, Johnny—one of you come in
please.”</p><p>It was finally Johnny who answered. The big–worded archaeologist and
geologist did not use any jaw–breaking words. He did not use those on
Doc. He said, “Yes?”</p><p>“Are you in the air?”</p><p>“We just took off from the Hudson River,” Johnny explained.</p><p>Doc turned to Ham. “Where did they rent this plane? What airport?”</p><p>Ham told him.</p><p>Doc gave the name and location of the airport to Johnny. He said, “These
men we are after have chartered a plane there. It is a large ship, and
the pilot should be leaving very soon. I want you to intercept the
plane. Intercept it before it takes off, if you can. Tell the pilot the
flight is canceled. Pay him a little something for his trouble, and give
him the idea you are the man who hired the plane.”</p><p>“Right,” Johnny said. “Anything else?”</p><p>“Report to me when you have stopped the plane.”</p><p>“Right.”</p><p>Doc Savage switched off the radio. “Where are the telephone lines?” he
asked Ham.</p><p>“Over here. They run along the road.” Ham pointed.</p><p>“Those are the lines that go to the airport where those men are
waiting?”</p><p>“Yes.”</p><p>Doc said, “Where are the pliers?” He got the pliers, stout ones, and
climbed a telephone pole and cut every wire.</p><p>“Why did you cut the wires?” Hicky asked.</p><p>“To keep the pilot of the rented plane from calling this airport and
learning we are pulling a trick.”</p><p>The bronze man did not volunteer further explanation, and Hicky was
puzzled. She obeyed the bronze man’s instructions to get in the old car.
Doc drove. They rattled back the way they had come.</p><p>Hicky, in the back seat, said, “But we’re going off and leaving those
men there,” to Long Tom, who was riding with her.</p><p>“Doc knows what he’s doing,” Long Tom said.</p><p>“What <span class="emphasis"><em>is</em></span> he doing?”</p><p>“Well, you see what we want most to know is what is behind this,” Long
Tom explained. “And instead of closing in on those guys and going to a
lot of trouble——”</p><p>Ham said, “Doc’s plan is this. He will——”</p><p>“I’ll tell her!” Long Tom snapped. “You shut up!” He glared.</p><p>Ham subsided, looking startled. It was not like Long Tom to flare up.
Ham nudged Doc. “Long Tom seems to like her,” he whispered.</p><p>Long Tom was saying, “Doc’s plan is probably this: He will take one of
our planes, pretend to be the pilot, and fly to the place that these
fellows want him to take them. That is an easy method of trailing them.”</p><p>“But it’s dangerous!” Hicky exclaimed.</p><p>Long Tom grinned.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>When big–worded Johnny Littlejohn reported that they had managed to head
off the hired ship, Doc Savage made a statement of approval, and
instructed them to fly at once to a pasture which was near where the
bronze man was then driving, and far enough from the field where the men
they were trailing were waiting.</p><p>Doc parked at the pasture edge, and put on a disguise. He clipped his
bronze hair differently, changed its color to a muddy brown with
chemicals, altered the color of his eyes to a nondescript gray with
eyeball cups, and gave his face a different contour with paraffin and
metal gadgets which went inside the nostrils. He added a gold cap over
one tooth, some stuff which made the remaining teeth yellowish and
unhealthy looking. He stuffed a handkerchief in each hip pocket to
broaden his hips.</p><p>Monk was flying the plane when it landed. The ship was a big streamlined
job that glistened in the sunlight like new silver. Doc had formerly
painted his planes a distinctive bronze color, but had discovered that
it made him too conspicuous, and had discontinued the practice.</p><p>Big–fisted Renny was uneasy. “Holy cow! This isn’t gonna be easy, Doc.”</p><p>The bronze man said, “You fellows rush back to the city and get another
plane. Be ready to follow.”</p><p>“How’ll we know where you go?”</p><p>“I will get into the radio transmitter on this ship,” Doc explained,
“and change the wiring so that the set does not turn off when the switch
is turned. The set will be on the air continuous. Use a direction finder
on the carrier wave.”</p><p>“All right,” Renny said. “But holy cow! I think this is taking a big
chance.”</p><p>The bronze man climbed in the ship, gunned the motors to clear the
cylinders of sluggish vapor, then opened the throttles, and the plane
crawled across the pasture. It took the air easily, and began to pitch
as it hit air currents over the low hills.</p><p>A few minutes later, Doc slanted the ship down at the airport, landed,
and taxied over to the hangars.</p><p>A squat man came out to meet him. The man wore dark corduroy trousers,
and had his hand in one pocket of a leather coat he was wearing.</p><p>Doc said, “Was there somebody here who hired me and this plane?”</p><p>“This ship from South Shore Airport?” the man asked. He had a harsh
voice.</p><p>“Yes, it is,” Doc said. Which was no lie; the plane had landed there,
although Monk and Renny and Johnny had been in it.</p><p>“I’m the man who hired you,” the man said. “Can you take off right
away?”</p><p>“Sure. The tanks are practically full.”</p><p>“Good. There are eight men with me.”</p><p>“Eight?” Doc shrugged. “This ship will carry twice that many. But what
about money? Who pays me?”</p><p>“How much do you want?”</p><p>“You show me the exact spot on the map where you want to go,” Doc told
him, “and I can tell more about that.”</p><p>The man climbed in the plane. “Got a map of Wyoming?”</p><p>There was a scale map of the hemisphere, and smaller charts printed on
thin paper, covering in detail almost every spot in North and South
America. Doc located the Wyoming chart and unrolled it.</p><p>The man looked at the map for a while.</p><p>“We go here,” he said, pointing.</p><p>“Apparently there is no established airport around there,” Doc said,
after consulting the map.</p><p>“It’s range country.”</p><p>“A flight like that for eight men and yourself,” Doc said, “will cost
four hundred dollars. Cash in advance.”</p><p>The man scowled. “Where do you keep your horse, Jesse James?” he asked.</p><p>Doc shrugged. “It’s no skin off my nose if you don’t want to pay it, or
haven’t got the dough.”</p><p>The man complained peevishly about the price. Doc remained adamant. He
was quarreling about the price for a reason. He hoped it would allay
their suspicions, if they were inclined to have any.</p><p>“Oh, all right, damn you!” the man snarled finally.</p><p>He paid off in good money.</p><p>He went away and came back with his eight men.</p><p>Actually, there were not eight men. Only seven. One of them was a
girl—Mira Lanson. She was dressed in boy’s clothing, and she had
dirtied her upper lip to give the impression of a boy’s mustache. They
had clipped off her hair crudely with scissors. Doc could not tell
whether she was coming along willingly, or not.</p></section><footer/></body></html>