<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter 9</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch08.xhtml" title="Chapter 8"/><link rel="next" href="ch10.xhtml" title="Chapter 10"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter 9" epub:type="chapter" id="id580"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter 9</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>Coulee War</em></h3></div></div></div><p>They refueled in Columbus, Ohio. It was night by then, and Doc came down
on the beam, then taxied over near the waiting room used by the regular
air lines.</p><p>“There oughta be a restaurant in there,” the leather–coated leader said.
He eyed Doc. “Will we get to this place in Wyoming tonight?”</p><p>Doc said, “We will have to land at some regular airport and wait until
daylight, so that we can spot a landing field.”</p><p>“We might as well kill some time here, then,” the man growled. “Take
your time refueling. We’re going to eat.”</p><p>“All right,” Doc said easily. “And if I’m not here when you get back,
it’ll be because I’m getting something to eat, too.”</p><p>“Umph.”</p><p>The bronze man watched them walk away. Then, sliding out of the plane
quickly, he gave the attendant instructions about the gasoline, and paid
him for the amount he was to receive. “Just stick the ticket in the
cabin,” Doc instructed.</p><p>Doc headed for the west end of the waiting room, and from there worked
to a point where he could look on through a window. It was dark at that
end of the restaurant, and they would not be likely to notice him. He
unlimbered a small telescope that had considerable magnifying power.</p><p>He was a skilled lip reader, and all of the group were facing in his
direction.</p><p>“That pilot,” the leader was saying, “claims we can get there as soon as
he can find daylight enough to land.”</p><p>“He suspect anything?” a man asked.</p><p>“Of course not.”</p><p>“I can fly that plane,” a man leaned over to say. “Why don’t we knock
him off right away and get it over with?” He was a thin blood man with a
skull–thin face and rather plump hips.</p><p>“That looks like a lot of airplane to me,” the leader said.</p><p>“I can fly it.”</p><p>“Just the same,” said the leader, “I think we’ll land before we do
anything about the pilot. That plane might have tricks you don’t know
anything about.”</p><p>The thin–faced man, who had said he was a pilot, fell silent and sulked.</p><p>When it became evident that he was not going to learn anything, Doc
Savage withdrew from the window. He managed to pick up two sandwiches at
the soda fountain—separate from the lunchroom—and went back to the
plane. He was careful to let them see him consuming the sandwiches when
they returned.</p><p>“All set?” he asked.</p><p>“All ready,” they told him. “Let’s go.”</p><p>Doc Savage lifted the big plane into the air. In order not to reach
Wyoming before daylight, he flew well below the top speed of the ship.</p><p>He kept a close, but surreptitious, watch on his passengers. He was
convinced now that they did not plan to let him go unmolested, that they
intended to kill him.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>They met strong headwinds, so they were a little later than expected in
reaching Wyoming. The Big Horn Mountains stood up to the northward,
sunlight bright against the rocky flanks, here and there a snow cap like
a crown of tinsel. After that, there was the Big Horn River, not much
larger than some Eastern creeks down here, then a long stretch of
monotonous prairie that verged on desert, veined with irrigation canals
at long intervals, here and there verdant green where the canals
emptied.</p><p>Suddenly they were in a hag’s dream of stone pinnacles, of bare, arid
peaks as unpatterned as if made by a child’s playful chopping. These
shoved up. The peaks grew higher. The canyon grew deeper, narrower. Now
and then there was a scrawny scrub pine. Then, abruptly, there was a
valley, and to the South, the Broken Circle Ranch.</p><p>The leader of the seven men came forward and asked Doc where they were,
had the bronze man point out their position carefully. The chart showed
the names of the big ranches in the vicinity. The Broken Circle was one
of these.</p><p>“Head up this way more,” the man said.</p><p>Doc decided the fellow wanted to stay well clear of the Broken Circle
outfit.</p><p>Mira Lanson had remained entirely quiet, seated well back in the cabin.
There had been nothing to show whether she was a prisoner or a member of
the gang. But she did not look happy.</p><p>A few minutes later, the leader clutched Doc’s shoulder and pointed.
“Down there,” he said. “You see that marker?”</p><p>The marker consisted of several saddle blankets arranged in the form of
an arrow. The blankets lay against light gray alkali, and were gaudily
noticeable.</p><p>Doc slanted the plane down and adjusted the wing flaps so that the speed
could be slow. He circled and saw that the ground was smooth enough for
a landing.</p><p>He landed, and cocked the plane into the wind before he cut the motors.</p><p>Three men came out of the sagebrush nearby. One of them was Albert
Panzer. He wore his gaudy chaps made from the hide of a black–and–white
pinto pony.</p><p>Panzer waved. He met the leader of the group who had arrived by plane,
and they shook hands. The others got out of the plane. All of them
seemed to know the three men who had met the ship. The possible
exception was Mira Lanson. She was strangely stiff in manner, and spoke
to no one.</p><p>They held a conference some distance from the plane. They stood so that
Doc Savage could see their faces, and not so far away that, although he
could not understand their words, he could read their lips.</p><p>Panzer asked, “What happened to Doc Savage?”</p><p>“We gave him the slip in New York,” the other explained. “I think we’re
rid of him.”</p><p>“Did you cover up everything, so there’s no chance of his following us
out here?”</p><p>“Sure.”</p><p>“How about that body?”</p><p>“Hubert Brackenridge’s body? We got it, and burned it. Don’t worry about
anything turning up on that angle.” The other grinned.</p><p>“How about this pilot?” Albert Panzer was clever; he did not glance in
the direction of the plane as he spoke.</p><p>“We thought about knocking him off at first,” the other said suavely.
“But we changed our mind. The pilot seems a right guy. We may need this
plane again. So we decided on a different course.”</p><p>Albert Panzer frowned. “Yeah? What kind of a course?”</p><p>“Let’s have him stick around with his plane. Tonight we will come back
and sound him out. He might be persuaded to join up with us.”</p><p>He evidently said something more, but the other man stepped around so
that he was between Doc and Panzer’s face, so that the bronze man could
not tell what was said.</p><p>Neither did Doc catch the next half–dozen or so exchanges of speech,
because he could not see either man’s lips. He did watch their faces. He
saw Panzer register astonishment, then doubt, and finally the man
shrugged. Panzer then lighted a cigarette, and in doing so, stepped
around into such a position that his lips and those of the other man
were visible.</p><p>“In case we have to do that,” Panzer said, “this pilot might be handy.
Your idea is all right. We’ll ask him to wait here, and later try to
sound him out about joining us.”</p><p>The leader of the new arrivals from New York nodded. He turned and came
back to the plane.</p><p>“Listen,” he said to Doc Savage. “We’ve been talking it over, and it
looks like we might need this plane some more.”</p><p>“What you want me to do?” Doc asked. “Wait around?”</p><p>“Yes. You wait here. The rest of us are going to take a little trip into
the hills. Some of us will be back later. That all right with you?”</p><p>“You want to hire me some more?” Doc asked.</p><p>“Yeah.”</p><p>“I’ll wait here,” the bronze man said.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>All of them—those who had been in the plane, and the trio who had met
them—trudged off across the alkali flat. The naked hills were nearby,
thrusting up with surprising abruptness. They disappeared into a canyon.</p><p>Albert Panzer kept walking until he made sure they were out of sight of
the plane.</p><p>“One of you,” he said suddenly and harshly, “go back and keep a watch
and make sure that guy is still in the plane.”</p><p>One man detached himself hastily, went back. He bellied down in the
sagebrush on a small ridge, peered at the plane and made sure Doc Savage
was at the ship. Doc was examining one of the motors. The man signaled
that fact to Panzer.</p><p>Albert Panzer whirled on the leader of those who had come on the plane.</p><p>“Now,” Panzer said, “what tipped you off that the pilot is Doc Savage?”</p><p>“Two things.”</p><p>“Let’s hear them.”</p><p>“First, that pilot was watching us in Columbus, Ohio, where we were
eating in a restaurant. I saw his reflection in a polished metal
towel–holder for paper towels. He was watching through kind of a
telescope. Later I figured that out. Lip reading. Second, a pilot just
happened to come up to us at the Columbus Airport and ask me if that
wasn’t Doc Savage’s plane we had come in, because it looked like one
that Savage designed.”</p><p>“That,” said Panzer, “doesn’t look so good.”</p><p>“You’re telling me.”</p><p>“Doc Savage is a big man. Physically, I mean. A very big man.”</p><p>“So is this pilot.”</p><p>“He must be Savage. The only other one of Savage’s men who is near his
size and height has fists so big that they almost look deformed. How’s
this guy’s fists?”</p><p>“They are normal size.”</p><p>“It’s Savage, then.” Albert Panzer took a couple of angry, pacing turns
through the sand. He scowled up at the sharp rock walls of the canyon.</p><p>The other seemed nervous about Panzer’s disapproval. “Of course, we
could go ahead and croak him now,” he said, “but I thought——”</p><p>“I wouldn’t bet on that,” Panzer said fiercely. “If we had Savage here
now, with six–guns pointing at him, I wouldn’t bet a cent on the
outcome.”</p><p>“I thought,” the other stated hastily, “that it would be better if we
wiped out this Savage crowd all at once.”</p><p>“How you figure we do that?”</p><p>“Keep an eye on him today. Chances are he’s having his friends follow
him in another plane. When they get here, they’ll start out looking for
us. We leave a plain trail. We set a trap. They follow the trail into
the trap.”</p><p>Albert Panzer rubbed his jaw. He grinned thinly. “It sounds like a good
idea. But I’ll have to take it up with the boss.”</p><p>“Is the boss where you can make a contact?”</p><p>“You be sure Doc Savage stays with that plane,” Panzer said, “and I can
get away long enough to use our radio transmitter. I think I can make
contact all right.”</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>Doc Savage remained with the plane most of the morning. He spent some
time in the cabin, and during that interval, he communicated with Monk
and the others flying in from the East and instructed them where to land
and how to do it.</p><p>There was a high ridge immediately to the east, and on the other side of
this Doc had noted, before landing, plenty of flat coulee bed suitable
for a plane. Doc instructed Monk to put the silencers on the motor of
the plane and come in very low, out of sight behind the ridge, and land
and wait.</p><p>About the time he judged the plane flown by Monk was due to come within
hearing, Doc started one of the motors of his own plane. He ran the
motor and tinkered with it. The exhaust made a great deal of racket,
enough to cover any sound that Monk’s ship might have made.</p><p>Doc waited until Monk must surely have landed.</p><p>He wrote a note. The note said:</p><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>I saw a creek over the hill. Going over there to take a bath.</td></tr><tr><td>Back by dark.</td></tr></table><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>Pilot.</p></blockquote></div><p>He fastened the note to the cabin–door handle with a string. Carrying a
towel ostensibly flung over his shoulder, he walked away, heading south
toward a spot where there actually was a small stream. Once out of
sight, he quickened his pace and veered east.</p><p>Monk and Ham, their two pets, met him just beyond the ridge.</p><p>Monk said, “Long Tom, Renny and Johnny are down at the plane. We landed
without any trouble.”</p><p>“Think anyone could have seen you from the other side of the ridge?” Doc
asked.</p><p>“Not a chance.”</p><p>“How about the girl?”</p><p>“Hicky? She’s with us. Making a bigger hit than ever with Long Tom.
Seems she is interested in electricity and radio and stuff. Right up
Long Tom’s alley. He’s been letting her use the plane radio.”</p><p>“Hicky has been using our plane radio?” Doc asked.</p><p>“Yes.”</p><p>“When?”</p><p>“Oh, at various times during the day. We had radio bearings and weather
reports to get. And Long Tom changed the wave length of the set over to
the amateur band and let her talk to some hams.”</p><p>Doc Savage made no comment, although there was some very slight,
quizzical expression on his features.</p><p>They walked back toward the plane.</p><p>Renny, Long Tom and Johnny were staring up at the ridge.</p><p>“I thought I saw somethin’ move up there,” Renny rumbled. “Somethin’
black.”</p><p>“Probably a buzzard,” Doc Savage said.</p></section><footer/></body></html>