<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter 10</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch09.xhtml" title="Chapter 9"/><link rel="next" href="ch11.xhtml" title="Chapter 11"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter 10" epub:type="chapter" id="id600"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter 10</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>The Newsboy</em></h3></div></div></div><p>It was Albert Panzer’s head—topped by a black hat—which Renny had seen
projecting over the top of the hill. Panzer had become somewhat unwary,
and he had jerked back in mad haste, growing suddenly pale.</p><p>He was roundly cursed by the man with him. “You damned fool,” said the
man. “If they would see us now, the goose would be cooked.”</p><p>Panzer took the cursing meekly. It was a long time before he took
another chance and peered over at the plane. He exhaled in relief. “They
didn’t see me,” he said. “Whew! Well, it’s working out the way we
figured.”</p><p>“You want me to keep track of them?” the other man asked.</p><p>Panzer retreated hurriedly until he had joined his men. They were
heavily armed. Three of them carried cases of dynamite, and two others
had electric detonating equipment and wire.</p><p>“Come on,” Panzer said.</p><p>He led them up the canyon to a spot where it branched, and where there
was a cliff, not quite sheer, but almost so. Up the side of this cliff,
a steeply jagged scratch, there was a trail.</p><p>Panzer said, “Plant the dynamite along the ridge, in that crack we found
up there.”</p><p>They spent an hour at this task, and Panzer surveyed the job when it was
done.</p><p>“Nice,” he said. “The shots are spread so they’ll bring the whole face
of the cliff down on that path. Now plant two more charges, one above
and one below, to close the canyon if we have to.”</p><p>This was done.</p><p>Panzer glanced at the sky. “It’s late enough in the afternoon now that
we can pull this off. Some of us will go to the plane and serve as bait
to draw them on.” He looked over his men. “You’ll go, Tuck. And you——”</p><p>Tuck said, “I don’t want any part of this Savage, if you don’t mind.”</p><p>Panzer scowled at him. He looked at all of them, then made his voice as
insulting as he could and asked, “Are any more of you yellow?”</p><p>Tuck said, “Call it yellow if you want to. I still call it good sense.”</p><p>No one else said anything. Panzer hitched at his black–and–white chaps.
“I’m going,” he said. “And I want two more of you. We won’t take the
whole gang, in order that Savage will not be tempted to grab us on the
spot. We want him to trail us in hopes of getting the whole gang.”</p><p>Two men volunteered. They looked more desperate than brave, following
Panzer down the canyon to the plane.</p><p>Doc Savage was stretched out under one wing of the ship, as if dozing.
He stood up when Panzer and his two men came close.</p><p>“Get tired of waitin’?” Panzer asked.</p><p>“I left a note that I was going swimming,” Doc explained. “But I got
back before you fellows did.” He studied them. “What about hiring my
plane some more? You decided about that yet?”</p><p>Panzer was an actor. He nodded blandly. “Yes. You camp here with the
plane, so it will be available. We will pay you for waiting time.”</p><p>“That is fair enough,” Doc admitted.</p><p>Panzer looked at the western sky. It was near sundown, but not yet dark.
He had a hunch that Doc Savage and his men would follow the trail more
readily if it was dark, and there was less chance of them being seen.</p><p>“I think we’ll cook and eat something before we start back,” Panzer
said.</p><p>It was very dark when Panzer finished eating, picked his teeth with a
match and threw the match away. He had a new respect for Doc Savage by
now. Doc had not shown the slightest trace of tension, no indication
that he was acting. And the bronze man’s disguise amazed Panzer. By very
close inspection, knowing there was a disguise, he had found traces of
it.</p><p>“We’ll leave you now,” Panzer said. Then, with bland solicitude, “You
have blankets and food? You will be comfortable?”</p><p>“If I’m getting paid for it, I won’t mind,” Doc said.</p><p>Panzer tucked his rifle under his arm and moved away. His two men
followed him, and they gained the mouth of the canyon.</p><p>“That big bronze guy,” one of the men whispered, “gives me the creeps.
You notice how he acted? As casual as could be. But he never turned his
back to one of us, not once.”</p><p>“To trap a fox,” Panzer said, “you got to be a fox.” He said it rather
proudly.</p><p>“We might have shot him down right there while we were having supper.”</p><p>“And his five men would have cleaned us up in no time. They’re loitering
around there in the sagebrush somewhere. Anyway, I think Savage was
wearing a bulletproof vest.”</p><p>They went carefully, moving with infinite caution. Panzer found a niche
and stationed one of his men near the trail.</p><p>“After they get past, and start up the cliff face,” Panzer said, “you
blow this whistle.” He gave the man a whistle which had a thin, piping
tone.</p><p>Panzer and his one companion climbed on up the trail. They went rapidly,
for they were nervous. Too, they wanted plenty of noise, in order to
guarantee pursuit.</p><p>On top Panzer scampered well back from the edge. His men were crouched
there. One of them was doubled over the generator which would detonate
the electric caps they had rigged in the dynamite charges.</p><p>“Listen for a thin, piping whistle,” Panzer said.</p><p>They waited. The moon was low, but bright enough to make noticeable
shadows. Peaks shoved up around them like fangs, and on all sides, and
not as far away as usual, the coyotes were making a yipping, forlorn
uproar. The world was a darkly grotesque and haunted place.</p><p>Suddenly, the whistle came.</p><p>“They’re on the trail!” Panzer gritted. “Let it go!”</p><p>The man with the generator let it go. It was an old–fashioned blasting
generator; you shoved down on a handle like a tire pump. It made a noise
like a grandfather clock getting ready to strike, then, in the middle of
that low whirring, the earth jumped down and then up, down and then up
with great sudden violence, and the earth, the universe, became a roar.
Those who had not been shocked off their feet were nearly upset by the
blast.</p><p>There was a grinding like a fabulous dog eating a monstrous bone.</p><p>Panzer balanced on hands and knees and said, “Well, they’re buried under
a hundred feet of stone.”</p><p>A man walked to the canyon rim—the new canyon rim—for a titanic
fragment of it had been blasted down into the crack below. He poked a
flashlight beam downward. The light was like a stiff white rod in the
dust.</p><p>“I would say buried nearer two hundred feet,” he said.</p><p>Panzer stiffened. “Listen!”</p><p>There was some rumbling of rock.</p><p>“Listen!” Panzer screamed more loudly.</p><p>A voice was coming up out of the canyon. It was a frantic voice, and one
they recognized. It was the lookout. The man they had left down there.
The man who was to blow the piping little whistle as the signal for
death.</p><p>“Watch out!” he was shrieking. “It was a trick! Savage knew about it!
He’s got me! You didn’t kill me!”</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>Down in the canyon, and near the mouth of the place, long and bony
William Harper Littlejohn moved as if his life depended on it. He leaped
wildly over boulders, sprawled across greasewood bushes. Finally he
reached the man who was screaming.</p><p>The fellow had gotten his gag out. Johnny jammed it back in place.</p><p>“I’ll be superamalgamated!” Johnny groaned.</p><p>He was infinitely disgusted.</p><p>A moment later, Long Tom Roberts arrived. Long Tom said, “I thought you
were to watch that lookout after we grabbed him, and keep him quiet!”</p><p>Johnny said nothing. He was too disappointed to speak.</p><p>Long Tom demanded, “Did Doc and the others have time to reach the top of
the canyon wall and tie into Panzer and his gang?”</p><p>That was answered twenty minutes later, when Doc Savage and the others
returned.</p><p>Monk said, “They got away. They had horses hidden over the hill. They
got to the broncs before we could reach ’em, and rode like blazes.”</p><p>“Can we trail them when it gets daylight?” Long Tom inquired.</p><p>Doc Savage said, “If you will listen, you will know the answer.”</p><p>They paid attention to the night. There was a faint sound far away. It
was like a big river running fast, except for a small noise now and then
that might have been distant automobile horns beeping.</p><p>“Cattle,” Long Tom guessed.</p><p>“There was a big herd over the ridge,” Doc agreed. “They have stampeded
them, and will ride among them until they get a chance to ride clear,
one at a time, and meet somewhere.”</p><p>Ham said, “Which is another way of saying there isn’t one chance in a
million of trailing them.”</p><p>Doc Savage went over to the prisoner.</p><p>“Where is that poison?” the bronze man asked loudly. “We might as well
dispose of this fellow without delay.”</p><p>The man on the ground, the one who had been left to whistle the death
signal—his whistle had been taken from him by Monk, who had blown it,
and who was fiddling with it now—groaned in terror.</p><p>Monk Mayfair turned a flashlight on his own face, apparently by
accident, and made a horrendous face. A horrendous face was not a
difficult job for Monk.</p><p>“We ain’t got nothin’ but slow poison,” he said. “But that’ll do the
job.”</p><p>Ham said angrily, “You stupid missing link! What do you mean, not
packing anything but slow poison! We haven’t got much time to waste.”</p><p>“Either fast or slow, he’s dead, ain’t he?” Monk growled.</p><p>Monk went away.</p><p>Hicky had come up in the darkness. They had placed her in a spot of
safety. The talk about poison had caused her to look completely
horrified. “You’re not—you’re not——” She choked up.</p><p>Monk came back with a vial and hypo needles. With infinite glee, he
stripped one of the needles open, filled it and fell upon the prisoner.</p><p>The prisoner had courage. “If you lugs think you’re gonna scare me into
talkin’,” he said, “you’re lookin’ for a wind from the wrong direction.”</p><p>“Have we asked you a question?” Monk demanded. “A single question?”</p><p>He jabbed the hypo into the man.</p><p>Hicky got pale and swayed. She looked so sickened by what was so
obviously a cold–blooded murder that Long Tom felt moved to draw her
aside.</p><p>“That’s only truth serum they’re giving him,” Long Tom whispered. “But
you’re being a big help by looking so sickened.”</p><p>“To make it look better,” Hicky said, infinitely relieved, “I’ll go back
and pretend to faint.”</p><p>“Good.”</p><p>The captive was deeply impressed by the realistic faint which Hicky
pulled. He became blue, with traces of green. He twisted and tried to
cry out, but the gag and the ropes which held him restrained his
efforts.</p><p>Hicky could see, as time passed, that the drug was having a drastic
effect on the man.</p><p>“Truth serum,” Long Tom told Hicky, “is dangerous stuff to use. That’s
why Doc does not employ it when there’s any other way out.”</p><p>“But why all the deceit about its being poison?”</p><p>“Truth serum is funny stuff. If a guy knows he’s given the stuff, he can
mighty often determine not to answer any questions truthfully, and get
the job done.”</p><p>Doc Savage went to work on their prisoner. The man’s talk was rambling,
disconnected, hard to understand. Like nothing so much as the babbling
of a drunk.</p><p>What the man knew summed up as: Albert Panzer was in charge of
operations, but he was not the big boss. The man did not know who the
real boss was. He had heard Panzer call the person Becky.</p><p>Sometimes he thought Panzer took his orders from a woman, the man said.</p><p>Panzer had been secretive. He did not reveal the identity of the person
they were working for, and he had kept secret the general purpose of
their activities. This had puzzled everyone.</p><p>One thing was sure: A cowboy named Ben Duck was in possession of
information concerning a puzzle where you shook leaden feathers into
holes on a painted green eagle. Ben Duck had taken this puzzle off
Pilatus Casey, an old prospector who had been murdered.</p><p>“Who murdered Pilatus Casey?” Doc asked.</p><p>“Panzer done the job,” the man mumbled.</p><p>“How?”</p><p>The prisoner didn’t know how.</p><p>“What is the exact significance of this green eagle puzzle?” Doc
inquired.</p><p>The captive didn’t know that, either.</p><p>“Where,” Doc asked, “is Ben Duck being held?”</p><p>The prisoner knew that, at least. It took them almost an hour of
sweating patience to get a description of the exact location of the
place out of him.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>It was around dawn when Doc Savage found the spot where Ben Duck had
been held. They knew it was the spot by the evidences of camping—tin
cans and discarded food containers and the general filth of a careless
camp—in the vicinity.</p><p>“Why!” Hicky exclaimed. “This isn’t the spot where they took Ben Duck at
first.”</p><p>“Remember,” Doc reminded her, “that you notified the sheriff that Ben
Duck had been seized. They probably had to move their captive to evade
the sheriff.”</p><p>The bronze man, once he was certain Ben Duck was not at the camp—and no
one else, for that matter—went searching. There were indications that
the camp had been broken hastily. He hunted for a trail.</p><p>When he found a trail, it was the trail of at least seventy cattle, the
sharp hoofs of which had wiped out all horse trail.</p><p>“Bet it was the same bunch of cattle they picked up right after they got
away from us,” Monk muttered. “They were smart enough to drive them up
here, so as to keep on covering their trail.”</p><p>Doc spent some time following the cattle trail. He gave up when
convinced it was hopeless—the cattle were in a small valley, where he
came upon them suddenly. But the riders were nowhere in sight. They must
have quitted the herd separately, wherever there was hard stone that
would hide hoofmarks.</p><p>Doc said, “We will go back to the Broken Circle Ranch.”</p><p>“You think we might pick up something there?” Ham asked.</p><p>“There are loose ends,” Doc said.</p></section><footer/></body></html>