<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter 11</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch10.xhtml" title="Chapter 10"/><link rel="next" href="ch12.xhtml" title="Chapter 12"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter 11" epub:type="chapter" id="id620"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter 11</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>Horse Trough</em></h3></div></div></div><p>D’Orr smirked and rubbed his hands when they landed their plane in the
alfalfa meadow below the Broken Circle Ranch buildings. He thought they
were dudes, customers. They did not disillusion him.</p><p>Monk and the others were puzzled that Doc Savage seemed in no hurry. He
took rooms for all of them at the ranch, and engaged horses. It was very
rough country in back of the ranch, of course, and they would need
horses if they went anywhere. But they thought the bronze man was
wasting time.</p><p>The sheriff came out that afternoon.</p><p>“Hello, Sheriff Gates,” Doc Savage called to him.</p><p>“I never saw you before,” the sheriff said, staring at Doc.</p><p>“I am McCain.”</p><p>“Huh?” The sheriff took a pair of handcuffs out of his pocket. “You
don’t look like McCain, except that you’re big. But I think I’ll arrest
you.”</p><p>Doc Savage explained who he was, and showed documents proving his
identity. Then he told the story, from the time old Pilatus Casey had
sent him a wild appeal for help from Wyoming. Doc told what he knew
about the green eagle puzzle. It did not sound like much.</p><p>The sheriff rolled a cigarette carefully. “Why didn’t you tell me you
was Savage before?”</p><p>“Did not think it would be best if the gang knew I was interested.”</p><p>“What gang?”</p><p>“Panzer and his men. The fellows who grabbed poor Ben Duck.”</p><p>“Who,” asked the sheriff, “is the brains behind this?”</p><p>The bronze man shrugged. The sheriff drew on his cigarette. This thing
was an intricate enigma, so puzzling that the sheriff felt strange. It
was not like cow rustling and shooting scrapes and disputes over line
fences and waterholes.</p><p>“I got no idea where they’re holdin’ Ben,” the sheriff said. “I looked
for him everywhere.”</p><p>“They are torturing him in an effort to find a green eagle puzzle.”</p><p>Fierceness jumped over the sheriff’s face. “It’s gonna be tough on them
hombres when I tie into ’em,” he said. “Ben is a fine young man.”</p><p>D’Orr was standing by, listening. He asked, “Any reward for finding
Donald Duck?”</p><p>Monk gave his belt a hitch and frowned at the man. D’Orr had tried to
foist the highest–priced accommodations on them, and had overcharged on
top of that. Monk did not like the fellow.</p><p>“Why should there be a reward?” Monk asked harshly.</p><p>D’Orr shrugged. “I thought you fellows might want to find him real bad.”</p><p>Monk stepped forward. The homely chemist’s shoulders were hard, the way
they were when he felt like fighting. “You got us pegged wrong,” he
said. “We’re not in this for money. We’re in it to help a guy.”</p><p>Doc Savage spoke quietly.</p><p>He said, “We will give five thousand dollars for information leading to
the rescuing of Ben Duck alive.”</p><p>Monk swallowed. He was astounded.</p><p>The sheriff grabbed Doc Savage’s hand and pumped it. “That’s fine,” he
exclaimed. “Ben Duck is a nice young man.”</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>Monk did not understand why Doc had come to the Broken Circle Ranch, and
Monk was not alone in being puzzled. The others could not see an object
in it. The bronze man’s behavior seemed dilatory. It appeared that his
time could have been better spent in the hills hunting Ben Duck and the
men who were holding him and torturing him.</p><p>Doc Savage was not perturbed. Still, it was hard to tell when he was
excited or calm. His control over his emotions was remarkable.</p><p>Doc visited Ben Duck’s bunkroom. He went through Ben’s meager
belongings. Eventually he came up with one object that interested him—a
suit of underwear. A suit that had been worn, but which was not as
soiled as another one.</p><p>“Looks like Ben Duck wore long–handled underwear the year around,” Monk
remarked. “But what’s so interesting about that particular suit?”</p><p>“It seems a little strange,” Doc pointed out, “that he stopped wearing
it when it was scarcely soiled. The other two suits, you’ll notice, are
rather dirty.”</p><p>Doc examined the underwear. On one sleeve, the right, he found a
greenish stain. He decided it was moss.</p><p>He said, “The underwear must have been taken off because one sleeve got
wet. It got wet where there was moss on or in the water.”</p><p>He went out to the horse–watering tank, took off his shirt, and began
exploring in the mud in the bottom of the tank.</p><p>When he found the taped tin which contained the puzzle, he carried it
into the house and opened it. Only his five men were present when he
brought out the puzzle.</p><p>They studied the thing, and they were completely at a loss. At least the
five associates of Doc Savage were. Doc himself made no comment.</p><p>But after about five minutes, Doc Savage did something that held a great
deal of meaning for the others, and also puzzled them. Doc made a small
trilling sound. It was a strange, low, exotic sound, partaking of the
weirdness of a wind through a naked forest. It had a ventriloquial
quality, seeming to come from everywhere.</p><p>The sound was a small unconscious mannerism of the bronze man’s in
moments of mental excitement.</p><p>Every one of his five associates was convinced that he had suddenly
understood the significance of the puzzle. They were more sure when he
seemed not to hear Monk’s queries about what he’d decided.</p><p>Monk scratched his head. “It’s kind of silly, all this furor over that
thing.”</p><p>Doc said. “It’s clever—very clever.”</p><p>Then he did another thing that surprised him. He took the tin box and
the puzzle out and showed it to his men, and to Sheriff Gates. The
sheriff stared at it and said, “Say, that’s like the one Ben Duck found
on his chest the night after he had a strange fainting spell on the
range.”</p><p>That made Monk grin. He knew that Ben Duck’s “faint” that night had been
the result of Doc’s anaesthetic gas; he knew also that Doc had planted a
puzzle similar to this one on Ben Duck in order to stir up some
excitement.</p><p>But this was the genuine puzzle. And no one seemed to know what it
meant. Doc put it back in the tin box, put it in his pocket.</p><p>The afternoon dragged. The only diversion occurred when Habeas Corpus
and Chemistry, the two pets, became involved in a ludicrous melee.</p><p>The two pets had come along in the plane. Neither animal had much use
for the other, and their association at best was a guarded truce.</p><p>Like most of Wyoming, the region around the Broken Circle ranchhouse was
scabbed over thickly with cactus beds. The cactus was the prickly pear
type, small round wafers of yellow–green studded with long amber needles
that could strike at skin in abrupt agony.</p><p>Habeas Corpus was investigating a cactus clump innocently when
Chemistry, the chimp, happened to back into one of the spines. Somehow
Chemistry got the idea Habeas was responsible. An instant later, there
was a yowling uproar as the two animals fought. The bedlam was augmented
by Monk and Ham, who separated the animals, then had a quarrel that was
louder than the one staged by the pets.</p><p>Eventually all participants retired in separate directions to pick the
cactus out of themselves.</p><p>It was near dark when D’Orr came riding in from the hills.</p><p>They had not known that D’Orr had been missing from the ranch a good
part of the afternoon.</p><p>D’Orr went to Doc Savage. He rubbed his hands together greedily. “You
can get that five thousand ready,” he said.</p><p>“What five thousand?”</p><p>“The reward for Ben Duck,” D’Orr said. “I’ve found him.”</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>D’Orr’s explanation was simple and logical. Yesterday he had noticed
signs that men were using a cave high up in the mountains, and he had
thought nothing of it; but now he was suspicious, and he had ridden up
there—with the result that he had seen, so he said, several men arrive
with Ben Duck a prisoner. D’Orr had ridden back pell–mell to the ranch
for aid.</p><p>“We’ll ride at once,” Doc said.</p><p>Monk muttered, “Doc, I’m gonna have to leave Habeas Corpus here. The
poor little cuss can’t seem to get along with this cactus.”</p><p>Ham’s pet chimp, it developed, would have to be left at the ranch for
the same reason.</p><p>Half an hour later, they rode west. The way led up a slope which looked
deceptively slight, but which was so steep that their horses walked and
panted. There was a green fur of pines. It was virgin timber, with
windfalls piled everywhere like fence rails.</p><p>They made a large party—D’Orr, the sheriff, a deputy, Hicky, Monk, Ham,
Renny, Long Tom and Doc Savage. It was slow, difficult going. Johnny was
unobtrusively missing.</p><p>Monk rode up alongside the sheriff. “You say some guys jumped Ben Duck
in his bunk one night, and Ben jabbed one in the face with a spur?”</p><p>Sheriff Gates nodded. “Spur musta marked his face, too,” Ben said.</p><p>Monk looked back at D’Orr. “When’d D’Orr start wearin’ that adhesive
tape on his schnozzle?”</p><p>“The next mornin’ after Ben—” Sheriff Gates pulled at his jaw with
thumb and forefinger. “Say, hell! What you drivin’ at?”</p><p>“I was just thinkin’,” Monk said.</p><p>Monk dropped back and spoke to Doc Savage in a low voice. “Ain’t we kind
of taking things for granted, Doc?” he asked.</p><p>“In what way?”</p><p>“This finding of Ben Duck seems a little johnny–on–the–spot to me,” Monk
said suspiciously.</p><p>“You do not think we should trust D’Orr, then?”</p><p>“Well, the thought kinda entered my head.”</p><p>Doc Savage made no comment. They rode on. It was late afternoon and hill
shadows piled across the valleys. They were higher up in the mountains.
It was hot in the sunlight, startlingly cool in the shadows.</p><p>“Wonder how D’Orr got his face hurt,” Monk remarked pointedly.</p><p>Doc still said nothing.</p><p>Monk muttered, “This is a heck of a fine chance for somebody to knock
off the whole gang of us. And they ain’t above tryin’, either.”</p><p>Doc Savage ducked to avoid a low–hanging pine limb.</p><p>“Furthermore,” Monk continued, “I don’t like that D’Orr’s looks.”</p><p>With a trace of careful patience, Doc Savage said, “Where do you think
Johnny is, Monk?”</p><p>“Johnny?” Monk peered back at their party. “Say, come to think of it, I
haven’t seen him around all afternoon.”</p><p>“Johnny,” Doc Savage explained, “followed D’Orr when he left the ranch
this afternoon.”</p><p>“What?”</p><p>“According to Johnny,” Doc said, “D’Orr is perfectly honest.”</p><p>As if given a telepathic awareness that he was under suspicion, D’Orr
dropped back and joined them. He said uneasily, “The nearer we get to
that place, the more I’m worried. I’m afraid we will run into a trap.”</p><p>“They do not expect us,” Doc reminded him.</p><p>“I know, but if we should run into a trap, it would sure look like I led
you into it,” D’Orr stated.</p><p>“It sure would,” Monk agreed pointedly.</p><p>D’Orr paled slightly. “I learned about this cave by accident, believe it
or not. I had earlier noticed that some men seemed to be using the cave.
I thought they were campers or hunters or prospectors. But, then, when I
heard about this trouble, it occurred to me that they might be some of
the men mixed up in the affair. So I rode up there this afternoon. And I
saw them bring Ben Duck to the cave.”</p><p>“You explained that to us when we started out,” Monk said.</p><p>“Well, it’s the truth.”</p><p>Monk looked at Doc. “Is that the way Johnny reported it, Doc?”</p><p>“Yes,” the bronze man said.</p><p>D’Orr looked dumfounded. “You had a man follow me?” Then he grinned.
“I’m glad. This takes it out of my hand. I’m damned glad you <span class="emphasis"><em>know</em></span> I’m
honest.”</p><p>Monk gave his trousers a hitch. Personally, he could never quite believe
D’Orr was honest. But then he was occasionally mistaken. The homely
chemist dropped back and rode alongside pretty Hicky, thereby irritating
Long Tom. Hicky seemed not to notice that both men were interested in
her. Hicky was preoccupied. “I hope we find poor Ben in time,” she said.</p><p>There was something in the way she mentioned Ben Duck that made Monk and
Long Tom stare at each other. It sounded as if <span class="emphasis"><em>he</em></span> might be the man
about whom she was most concerned.</p><p>“The cave,” announced D’Orr, “is on the far side of that ridge yonder.”</p><p>Doc Savage consulted his watch and saw that it was time for another
contact with Johnny. They had been communicating every half–hour. He got
off, removed the portable short–wave radio from a saddlebag and put it
in operation.</p><p>“Johnny,” he said.</p><p>Instantly, there was a whisper coming out of the receiver. The speaker
was excited, did not once lift his tone above a whisper. “I’ll be
superamalgamated,” he said. “Doc, this is Johnny. Something has gone
wrong. I’ve been watching that cave where they’re holding Ben Duck, and
somebody has tipped them off. They’ve set an ambush. I’m on the ridge
above you.”</p><p>“Where is the ambush?”</p><p>“Ahead about a mile,” the whisper said. “Doc, you come up here with
Monk, Ham and Renny. Leave the others with the sheriff and Long Tom.
That way, I think we can trap them.”</p><p>Doc asked, “Why are you whispering?”</p><p>“They’ve got a scout close. I’m hiding in a hollow tree.”</p><p>Doc said, “We are coming up.” He switched off the radio. “We will split
forces as Johnny suggests.” Doc indicated those who were to stay. “The
rest of you come with me,” he added.</p><p>Long Tom, who was to be left with the others, complained, “I don’t see
why we’re splitting up.”</p><p>“Johnny must be sure we can attack from different directions,” Doc said.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>Monk, Ham and Renny started climbing up the canyon side with Doc Savage.
They left their horses behind. They were very careful.</p><p>Sheriff Gates remained behind with his deputy, Long Tom and Hicky, and
D’Orr.</p><p>D’Orr was pale. He said, “It’s lucky we were warned. Oh, it’s lucky.”</p><p>Sheriff Gates frowned at D’Orr. “We better tie the broncs outa sight.
Over behind this dornick here will do.”</p><p>The stone he called a dornick was house–sized, had a base of tall brush.
They staked the animals out therein, and walked back out into the
evening sunlight.</p><p>There was a man waiting there. He was a bland man with cold, dark eyes.
He was a stranger. He said, “I’ve got Ben Duck here.”</p><p>He pointed at his feet. He was standing in tall weeds. There was a
figure, a man’s figure, lying in the weeds.</p><p>Sheriff Gates, Long Tom—everyone—dashed forward.</p><p>The man lying in the weeds got up. He had a long blue revolver. He waved
the gun at them. He was not Ben Duck.</p><p>“Sorry,” he said. “We had to use some kind of a gag to get you all out
where we could see you.”</p><p>Long Tom started to frown, and Hicky began filling her lungs with air,
her intention to scream.</p><p>“You let out a beller, kid,” the man told her, “and I’ll shoot
everything out from between those pretty ears of yours. And don’t think
I won’t.”</p><p>“Get their horses,” his companion ordered.</p><p>The man began searching the prisoners first. It was then that D’Orr made
his break. He swung a foot suddenly, kicked a man in the stomach. The
man doubled up. D’Orr grabbed his gun.</p><p>Long Tom started to join the fracas—and halted. The other man was
menacing him with a revolver. The fellow was so close that he couldn’t
miss. Reluctantly, Long Tom subsided.</p><p>D’Orr and his foe were down on the ground. They went over and over. In
soft sand, they did not make much noise. D’Orr seemed to be trying to
fire the pistol, although he did not quite have possession of it.</p><p>Then more men came out of the bushes. Four of them in a compact group.</p><p>Albert Panzer was one of the four newcomers. He said in a low voice,
“All right—brain that damned rancher!”</p><p>Men fell on D’Orr with pistol butts. The weapons rose and fell, made
hollow ugly noises. D’Orr sank down in the weeds. They kept on beating
him. Their breathing was ugly puffing, like small steam engines.</p><p>Panzer went over and looked at the thing in the weeds.</p><p>“You didn’t need to kill him,” he said. “Or is he dead?” He got down on
all fours and made an examination. “Dead as a mackerel.”</p><p>The men who had done the beating began to look scared. “What’ll we do
with the body?”</p><p>“Take it over there in the brush,” Panzer said.</p><p>They did that. They looked more scared when they came back. One of them
pointed at Long Tom and the others. “They saw it. They can testify
against us.”</p><p>“Don’t worry about that,” Panzer growled. “They won’t testify against
anybody.”</p><p>They got hold of the horses. The captives were forced to mount.</p><p>“Why don’t we just knock ’em off here?” asked one of the men who had
attacked D’Orr with a pistol butt. He was blue–pale.</p><p>Panzer said, “No, no, we got a plan. Keep ’em moving, and moving fast.
Let’s go.”</p><p>“What about Ben Duck?”</p><p>Panzer scowled. “We got more than Ben Duck to worry about. I’ll take
fifty Ben Ducks—if somebody’ll take Doc Savage.”</p></section><footer/></body></html>