<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter 12</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch11.xhtml" title="Chapter 11"/><link rel="next" href="ch13.xhtml" title="Chapter 13"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter 12" epub:type="chapter" id="id640"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter 12</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>When Ben Came Back</em></h3></div></div></div><p>Doc Savage and his three men used caution. They worked directly up the
side of the canyon. As nearly as they could judge, they had more than
half a mile to climb.</p><p>This was high altitude, and their breathing was deep and labored. They
did a great deal of flying at high altitudes, and that had acclimated
them to a certain extent to rarefied atmosphere.</p><p>Doc Savage was carrying the radio. When they were about halfway up the
ridge, he halted and put the instrument in operation.</p><p>“Johnny,” he said into the microphone.</p><p>The whisper came back at him.</p><p>“Are you climbing up the ridge?” it demanded.</p><p>Instead of answering, Doc Savage was silent a moment. His mouth
straightened out tightly.</p><p>Doc asked, “What shall we do with Elmer?”</p><p>“Elmer?” The whisper was vaguely puzzled. “Whatever you think it best.”</p><p>Monk, Ham and Renny stared at Doc Savage. Their expressions got stark.
The whispering voice on the radio had fallen into the trap. The correct
answer to the code question about Elmer should have been to tie ribbons
on Elmer. Renny muttered, “Holy cow! We’ve been led into something!”</p><p>Into the microphone, Doc said, “Hold it a minute while I ask what he
wants to do.”</p><p>“All right,” the whisper said. “But hurry!”</p><p>Doc Savage rotated the little radio outfit. The receiver loop was built
into the case, but it was almost as directional as a regulation
direction finder. The carrier wave of the other set was sufficient to
get a bearing. Obviously, the other transmitter was not on the ridge.</p><p>Doc was deeply shocked. They knew that, because he made the small,
unearthly trilling sound that was his unconscious habit in moments of
intense mental stress. He made it very briefly. It had a strained
quality.</p><p>Then the bronze man was going back down the canyon side. He went with
such flying speed that Monk and the other two were left behind. When
they overhauled Doc, he was standing on the canyon bed, near a huge
boulder, reading sign. The crushed weeds, the footprints in the sand,
told a story that seemed confusing to Monk and the others.</p><p>But to Doc it was evidently clear.</p><p>He said, “Long Tom’s party was tying their horses when they were held
up. There were two men at first. Later, more men joined them. They rode
off down the canyon.”</p><p>He searched for a while, followed one of the trails back into the
bushes, and dropped to a knee. He indicated a mark, square in shape, in
the sand.</p><p>“This is where they used Johnny’s radio,” the bronze man said grimly.
“That is the mark where they placed it on the sand.”</p><p>The bronze man’s face was showing more emotion than Monk had ever seen
in display before. There was anxiety. Utter self–disgust. Monk knew the
reason. Doc had made a mistake. He had failed to use the code check
about Elmer when the whisper that had said it belonged to Johnny had
first come over the radio. It was a small error. It was likely to cost
several lives.</p><p>Monk came over and touched Doc’s arm. “A man can’t bat a hundred per
cent all the time.”</p><p>The bronze man shrugged miserably. “There is no excuse for a mistake
being made at the wrong time.”</p><p>They found the form of D’Orr a bit later.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>D’Orr had been partly covered with brush, but he must have moved a
little, because one leg was exposed. They removed the brush quickly, but
did not change the position of his body. Doc made an examination.</p><p>“He is not dead,” the bronze man said. “Monk, you and Ham get cold
water. There is a small stream over to the left.”</p><p>While the others revived D’Orr, Doc searched for the trail left by the
departing captors and their prisoners. It led down the canyon a short
distance, then turned right, up the steeply rising bed of a smaller
canyon.</p><p>He had not gone far when he stopped suddenly, retreated, and eyed the
same on the trail. There was very little sign that it had been
disturbed; only the vaguest traces. He took a long stick and probed
cautiously.</p><p>They had taken some thin–walled glass bottles, filled them with an
ocherous liquid of utterly vile appearance, and buried the bottles.
Following the trail carelessly, Doc would have stepped on them, broken
them in the sand.</p><p>He raked a bottle to him, studied it. It was mustard gas, he decided.
Utterly deadly.</p><p>After that, he did not follow the trail directly. He kept wide of it.
But they had prepared for that, too.</p><p>There was a thorn bush. With fine thread, they had tied a limb back, so
that anyone walking past would break the thread and the thorn bush would
fly around and thrust its thorns into unwary legs. The thorns were
tipped with sticky stuff. Poison.</p><p>Doc went back.</p><p>D’Orr was sitting up when Doc reached him.</p><p>“How are you?”</p><p>“My head,” D’Orr groaned, “is noisier than a Chinese wedding. It’ll
never be the same again.”</p><p>Doc made another examination. “There are no fractures.”</p><p>“It’s a dang wonder,” D’Orr said. “They caught us by surprise. Two of
them at first. Then more came out of the brush.”</p><p>“What are they going to do with Long Tom, Hicky and the sheriff and his
deputy?” Monk asked. Monk’s tone was anxious.</p><p>“I don’t know,” D’Orr said. “But I wouldn’t want to be in their shoes.”</p><p>Ham still had his sword cane. He flourished it angrily. “What are we
waiting on? We can trail them.”</p><p>Doc shook his head. “No.”</p><p>“But why not?”</p><p>“They expect us to do that—they will lay all their plans on that
expectation. In fact, they have planted a number of traps—I found two
of them—and following them would be extremely dangerous.”</p><p>“Then what do you suggest?” Ham’s face was strained. “We’ve got to make
some progress on this thing before long. I wonder if you realize that
we’ve had setback after setback. When you narrow right down to what
we’ve accomplished—what have you? Practically nothing.”</p><p>That Ham should complain was unusual. His plaint bore no direct
criticism of Doc Savage; it was rather a bemoaning of their luck, most
of it bad so far.</p><p>D’Orr stood up.</p><p>“For the love of Mike!” he exclaimed.</p><p>“What’s the matter with you?” Monk asked.</p><p>“I just remembered something.” D’Orr stared at them. “When I was
half–conscious, I heard Panzer say something. Or rather, one of the
other men asked Panzer a question.” D’Orr’s excitement increased. “The
man asked what they should do about Ben Duck. And Panzer’s answer was
that they had something more than Ben Duck to worry about.” He indicated
Doc. “Meaning you.”</p><p>Doc’s expression became suddenly alert. “What did you think that meant?”</p><p>“I wasn’t in any condition to think at the time.” D’Orr felt tenderly of
his head. “However, now I would say that it sounded as if Ben Duck had
escaped.”</p><p>“Did they say Ben Duck had escaped?”</p><p>“No. But it sounded like that. I bet he has escaped.”</p><p>It was no more than four or five minutes later when a bedraggled,
disheveled, trembling figure stumbled out of the brush.</p><p>“Are—are you Doc Savage?” asked the apparition.</p><p>Doc nodded.</p><p>“I’m Ben Duck,” said the scarecrow. Then his knees buckled and he lay
down in the weeds and grass and ancient leaves.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>He had not collapsed from faint, or from lack of strength. Weakness of
relief described it. As Monk said later, it looked as if the fellow just
decided it was time to lie down and have himself a good shake. The
trembling subsided finally. “I knocked a man in the head with a rock,”
he said.</p><p>Looking pleased, Monk inquired, “Kill him?”</p><p>“Gosh, sure hope not,” said the other.</p><p>“You’re Ben Duck, eh?”</p><p>“Yes. They been holdin’ me. They was gonna starve me into tellin’ ’em
where that green eagle puzzle was. That was after the ornery snipes
tried beatin’ me.”</p><p>The man stretched out in the weeds as if at long last he could relax.
The knuckles of one fist were skinned. His leg, the left one, was minus
part of a trouser leg, and an evil blue color in spots, although not
much swollen. His nose was gashed deeply, and crimson had caked over his
lips and chin.</p><p>D’Orr dropped beside him. “What’d they do to your face, Ben?” he gasped.</p><p>“Remember the night some hombres got in my bunkroom?”</p><p>“Yes. You jabbed one of them in the face with a spur, you said.”</p><p>“The gent I spurred didn’t like it. He took off one of his spurs and
returned the favor—while I was tied up.” The grin the man gave D’Orr
was lopsided. “Yuh know somethin’? You hurt your face the same night. I
figured for a while you was the gent I spurred, maybe.”</p><p>“Why, Ben Duck!” D’Orr exclaimed, and looked completely horrified. “I
only bruised my face on a door.” Abruptly be reached up and, grimacing,
pulled off the bandage so that they saw his face. “See,” he said.</p><p>D’Orr’s face was only bruised and skinned. No spur had done that damage.</p><p>“Yeah, I know it wasn’t you,” the other said.</p><p>Doc Savage came over. “Ben, do you know what is behind this?”</p><p>“You’re Mr. Savage, ain’t you? I’m sure glad to meet you. Johanna
Hickman sure spoke high of your reputation.”</p><p>“Can you give us any information, Ben?”</p><p>“There’s a puzzle. It’s a thing made out of tin and cardboard and wood
and some lead feathers. It’s an eagle. You put the feathers in the
eagle.”</p><p>“Yes, we know.”</p><p>“That’s the key, that puzzle. You show me that, and I’ll solve the whole
thing.”</p><p>“All this trouble,” Doc asked, “has been over that?”</p><p>“There’s more to it than the puzzle, Mr. Savage. But you get me the
puzzle, and we can clear up the rest.”</p><p>“Did you have it?”</p><p>“I did. I got it off old Pilatus Casey when he was dyin’. He gave it to
me to give to his niece, Mira.”</p><p>“Did you give it to Mira?”</p><p>“Heck, no. They ran a fake Mira in on me. That was Johanna Hickman.
She’s a nice girl. They just roped her in on the mess.”</p><p>“Where is the puzzle?”</p><p>“In the mud in the bottom of the Broken Circle horse–watering tank. On
the west side. About two yards from the pipe where the water runs in
from the windmill.”</p><p>That was about where Doc had located the puzzle.</p><p>He reached inside his clothing and pulled it out. D’Orr’s eyes popped.</p><p>“We found it,” Doc explained. He handed it over. “Now, Ben, we want to
know what this thing means.”</p><p>“Two of you gents help me walk.”</p><p>“I’ll help you, Ben,” big–fisted Renny said. “Holy cow, what you want to
do?”</p><p>“We gotta go up to the top of this ridge, so I can see down the other
side. We gotta do it before dark, or I’ll have to wait till mornin’.”</p><p>“Why?”</p><p>“I’ll show you.”</p><p>“This sounds complicated, Ben,” muttered D’Orr.</p><p>“It’s so simple it’ll knock your hat off.”</p><p>They climbed the ridge in silence. It was fully ten minutes before D’Orr
asked, “You know where the gang is holed up, Ben?”</p><p>“I think I can show you. Say, Albert Panzer is the ringleader.”</p><p>“We know that, Ben,” D’Orr said. “Panzer fooled all of us there at the
ranch.”</p><p>“They got some prisoners. They got a girl. She’s old Pilatus Casey’s
niece. She’s the real Mira Lanson.”</p><p>“We know that, too.”</p><p>“Do you know what became of a guy named McCain who was there at the
ranch?” the other asked.</p><p>“McCain?” D’Orr said. “No, Ben. He disappeared after he got out of
Sheriff Gates’ jail.”</p><p>Monk opened his mouth—then closed it. D’Orr didn’t know that McCain and
Doc Savage were the same. That was high tribute to the bronze man’s
disguise ability. So D’Orr didn’t know who McCain had been. Monk had
thought he knew, although he’d given no particular thought to the point.</p><p>Monk decided not to tell D’Orr or Ben Duck that McCain had been Doc
Savage in disguise. His reason was a little twist of humor. He still
didn’t like D’Orr. He wanted to startle the man, to amaze and dumfound
him. When D’Orr was having a placid moment, and there was no excitement,
Monk would tell him who McCain had been. Then D’Orr would really feel
the effect of surprise.</p><p>Monk grinned as he climbed.</p><p>He was still grinning when Doc Savage began to sing. Then Monk lost his
grin, for the bronze man’s song was not exactly a song. It was pitched
low, the humming lingo was, and it was meaningless to the casual
listener.</p><p>Doc Savage was speaking Mayan, the little–known language which he and
his aids used for secret communication. “I am going to give you an order
in English,” the bronze man was saying. “Ignore it. Pretend to follow
the order, but actually ignore it.”</p><p>The bronze man’s strange singsong was silent for a while, then it
resumed, still in Mayan.</p><p>Monk listened to the Mayan words in growing amazement. He glanced at
Ham. The dapper lawyer was astounded, trying to hide it. So was Renny.
None of them spoke. But as they climbed, they came close to Doc Savage
and moved by his side, in order not to miss what he was saying, the
instructions he was giving.</p><p>Doc finished, was silent.</p><p>He said in English, “Wait a minute.” He stopped. “We need horses. Monk,
you and Ham go back to the Broken Circle Ranch and get horses for all of
us, plus enough animals to bring out our friends if we manage to rescue
them. And get a posse to help hunt for the sheriff.”</p><p>“I’m only Ben Duck and just a cow waddy,” their companion said
unexpectedly. “But I’d like to make a suggestion.”</p><p>“Go ahead,” Doc said.</p><p>“The less whoop an’ flutter we make, the more chance we got to take
these cussed hombres. It ain’t guns we need. It’s foxiness. I think we
got that without ringin’ in no posse to stir up the country.”</p><p>Doc Savage was thoughtful a moment. “Good idea,” he agreed. “Just get
the horses. Never mind the posse. Do not tell anyone what has happened.
Bring horses.”</p><p>“Right,” Monk said. “How about fetchin’ along our pets, Habeas Corpus
and Chemistry?”</p><p>“Have you decided they can stand the cactus?” Doc asked dryly.</p><p>“Sure,” Monk said. “They gotta learn to stay out of the stuff sometime.”</p><p>Monk and Ham walked away, down the canyon, heading in the direction of
the Broken Circle Ranch. Their faces were strangely grim.</p><p>Doc Savage and Renny climbed silently. D’Orr said, “I’m feeling better.
I can help Ben, here, to give you fellows a rest.” And Renny, smiling
slightly, said, “We’re not tired.” His smile, however, was strained.</p><p>There was sheer naked rock the last five hundred yards of going. The
late afternoon sun—it was already dark in the canyon bed—hit them with
a chilly brightness. They found a gulch in the stone which sheltered
them from prying eyes, and climbed through that.</p><p>D’Orr asked, “Where’s this place you’re headin’ for, Ben?”</p><p>“Up there,” he pointed. “You see that hogback and them rocks? From there
I can tell.”</p><p>“Why from there?”</p><p>“Because if you see what I think you’ll see, you’ll understand.”</p><p>D’Orr shrugged. He moved over beside Doc and Renny, muttered, “It’s
funny he’s not putting out any information. What do you think he’s
leading up to?”</p><p>Doc Savage shrugged. The bronze man’s features seemed more devoid of
expression than usual.</p><p>Later they rested and panted. D’Orr said suddenly, “Ben’s got somethin’
to tell you. It’s important.”</p><p>They moved over to the man’s side. He was holding his scarred face.</p><p>He said, “I just remembered this. You know that old geezer Pilatus
Casey? I overheard how they killed him.”</p><p>“How?” Doc asked.</p><p>“He really died of thirst an’ starvation. There wasn’t nothin’ fake
about that.”</p><p>“But, Ben, he had food and water in his pack, the sheriff said,” Doc
reminded.</p><p>“Sheriff didn’t analyze that food an’ water, did he?”</p><p>“No.”</p><p>“Poisoned.”</p><p>“Eh?”</p><p>“They caught old Pilatus Casey, Panzer and his gun–swaps did. They tried
to make the old man tell ’em where that eagle puzzle was hid. He
wouldn’t. They tortured him. He still wouldn’t tell. So they put some
poisoned food and poisoned water in his pack an’ turned ’im loose to die
on the desert. Fancy way of murderin’ him. Only he slicked ’em. He
picked up his puzzle, and didn’t eat none of the poisoned grub nor drink
no poisoned water. He give ’em the slip. Only he died before he could
get back afoot.”</p><p>D’Orr demanded. “Ben, can you testify to that in court?”</p><p>“I can testify I heard one of the gang tellin’ one of his pals, who had
come in from New York, how they done it.”</p><p>“That ought to be enough to hang all of them,” D’Orr said grimly.</p><p>Then he took a large revolver out of his clothing.</p><p>“Only they won’t nobody hang,” he said.</p><p>D’Orr pointed his gun at Doc Savage and said, “I know you got a
bulletproof vest. One move, and I’ll plant some lead between your eyes.”</p><p>Doc Savage did not make the move.</p></section><footer/></body></html>