<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter 13</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch12.xhtml" title="Chapter 12"/><link rel="next" href="ch14.xhtml" title="Chapter 14"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter 13" epub:type="chapter" id="id660"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter 13</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>The Feathered Eagle</em></h3></div></div></div><p>Three men came out of concealment and joined D’Orr. One of them was the
rascal Tuck, who had been afraid of Doc Savage in the first place. There
were four other men who made their presence known; they were sheltered
by rock, and they held rifles. Seven, that made. Seven in all. They
seemed awed by the thing they were doing.</p><p>D’Orr said, “Get Ben Duck here. Knock him down and tie him up.”</p><p>Tuck it was who came around behind the others and reached out and struck
with a fist, saying, “So we got you back again Benny.” Then, when his
victim had fallen to the ground Tuck ground a knee down on him and used
a rope for tying. Tuck’s knots were tied with a sailor perfection. “Nice
Benny,” he said. He slapped his victim’s face, very hard. “I’m gonna
pull your teeth, Benny,” he said, “and drive in nails where they came
out.”</p><p>“Tie Renwick next,” D’Orr ordered.</p><p>Tuck got up and came toward Renny and Renny said, “You lay a hand on me,
my friend, and I’ll put a foot through your insides.”</p><p>Tuck stopped. He stared at Renny. He must have fully understood the
expression on Renny’s face, for he turned and threw down the rope he was
carrying.</p><p>“He don’t like me,” he said. “Somebody else better tie him.”</p><p>It was a smart decision on Tuck’s part. Renny had made up his mind that
he hated the fellow utterly, and Renny would have attacked him, gun or
no gun. A small man with the wrinkled skin of a collapsed football and a
small brown yarn of tobacco juice staining one mouth corner tied Renny.</p><p>Renny looked at Doc Savage. “Did you know this pink–livered
blankety–blank of a D’Orr was one of the crooks?” he asked.</p><p>Doc Savage seemed not to hear the question. The bronze man’s metallic
features were motionless with a kind of expressionlessness that was a
little frightening to Renny.</p><p>D’Orr misunderstood. He thought Doc was scared. He came to the bronze
man boldly. “I bet you feel funny as hell,” he said.</p><p>There were tiny hot fires in Doc’s flake–gold eyes, but they were
masked, and D’Orr did not see them.</p><p>D’Orr’s pride expanded. “I guess I’m the first guy who ever got you in a
crack where you couldn’t get out.”</p><p>Doc did not answer.</p><p>D’Orr chuckled. It was a genuine chuckle, full of raw boasting arrogance
and glee over what he had accomplished. “And I kept hearing how tough
you were,” he said. He turned to Tuck. He jeered, “And you were scared
stiff of Savage.”</p><p>Tuck said, “Right now, I would rather be in Mexico.”</p><p>They tied Doc. Then D’Orr himself searched the bronze man very
carefully. He removed Doc’s coat and shirt and stripped off the alloy
chain mesh undergarment which was a bulletproof armor resembling ancient
mail, except that it was small in weight and bulk.</p><p>D’Orr appropriated the eagle puzzle. He unwrapped it—Doc still had the
thing in the tin box—and examined it. He let Tuck inspect it.</p><p>“Where,” asked D’Orr, “was Panzer going to meet us?”</p><p>Tuck shrugged. “We’ll show you.”</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>They climbed deeper into the mountains.</p><p>They came into a region which was not above timber line, yet there was
no timber. It was an arid, naked stretch of rugged stone.</p><p>D’Orr strode boldly, twirling a pistol. “You never suspected me, did
you?”</p><p>Doc Savage glanced at him, a faint twist of derisive amusement in his
flake–gold eyes.</p><p>D’Orr continued. “I was the inside man at the Broken Circle. Kept an eye
on things that went on around the ranch.” He leered. “I spotted old
Pilatus Casey for them.”</p><p>Doc seemed not to hear.</p><p>“You get me?” D’Orr said. “I spotted Pilatus Casey. If it hadn’t been
for me, he might have got away entirely. They expected him to come in
from the north.”</p><p>Getting no answer, D’Orr walked in smug silence for a while. Then he
chuckled, said, “For years I ran that dude ranch and didn’t hardly make
ends meet. Then along comes a thing that is big. And in a month, I make
more than all the dude–ranch owners in Wyoming will make in all their
lives.”</p><p>Doc said, “You do not need to explain that you are greedy.”</p><p>That made D’Orr mad. He snapped, “Yeah? Well—you’re in a fat mess,
ain’t you? We’ve got all of you. We’ve got Long Tom and Johnny. We’ve
got you and Renny. We’ve got Sheriff Gates, and that Johanna Hickman
girl. We’ve got Ben Duck.” D’Orr leered at him. “We’ve got everybody
that knows anything about this. So where can we go wrong?”</p><p>Doc said, “You have not got Monk and Ham.”</p><p>D’Orr snorted. “They have a gang of men planted on the Broken Circle
Ranch trail. They’ll take Monk and Ham.”</p><p>Doc looked concerned over that, and D’Orr chuckled. They climbed in
silence. At places, the going was almost sheer, a matter of crevices for
fingers and toes. It would be dark soon. And it was becoming bitterly
cold.</p><p>They came upon Albert Panzer suddenly. He had a number of men with him,
also Long Tom, Johnny, Sheriff Gates and the deputy. Hicky was there.</p><p>Doc was not permitted to communicate with the other prisoners. They were
led away, Long Tom and Johnny leading, then the Sheriff and his deputy.
Hicky followed. She waved just before she was forced out of sight.</p><p>Panzer came over. He stared at Doc Savage.</p><p>“Nice, nice,” he said. “Nobody knows how this pleases me.”</p><p>He scowled past Doc. “Ben Duck, too, eh! Well, well, one big family
again.”</p><p>D’Orr said, “I got the puzzle.”</p><p>“Hand it over.”</p><p>D’Orr gave Panzer the puzzle. Panzer handled it carefully, as if it was
something of immense value, and very fragile. He opened it, examined it
“This looks like it,” he said.</p><p>“I think it is,” D’Orr agreed.</p><p>Panzer stared at Doc Savage with complete hate. “If you are sure of it,
we can get rid of these prisoners right here. There’s an old bear cave
down the slope. We can shove the bodies in there and wall up the
entrance.”</p><p>D’Orr bit his lips. “We better be sure about that puzzle,” he said.</p><p>Panzer scowled and said, “Ben Duck, here, will know if it’s genuine.”</p><p>He gave an order and two men seized the quailing figure of the cowboy
and dragged him off into the brush. Panzer and D’Orr followed them,
Panzer carrying the puzzle. For a while, ugly sounds of a beating came
out of the brush. Then the pair returned. They looked satisfied.</p><p>“Take all the prisoners,” Panzer ordered, “and dump ’em into the cave.”</p><p>“Have we got time to check the puzzle before night?”</p><p>Panzer peered at the sky. “Afraid not. First thing in the mornin’, we’ll
do it.”</p><p>“Will that be all right with his nibs?”</p><p>“The big boss? He’s perfectly satisfied with the way things are going.”</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>They could tell time—in the cave—by the bats. The bats were there in
millions. They had been going out in the dusk, when Doc Savage and the
others had been brought in.</p><p>Lying in the darkness, Doc Savage had answered one question from Renny.
“Are they going to knock us off, right away?” Renny asked.</p><p>Doc told him, “They will probably wait until they are sure the puzzle is
the genuine one.”</p><p>“That means,” Renny said, “that they’ll have to take a long chance in
keeping us alive. I think they’re afraid of us. They may not want to
take that chance.”</p><p>“They murdered Pilatus Casey before they got the puzzle,” Doc said.
“They will go to great lengths before they repeat that mistake.”</p><p>They lay there, not in darkness, for there was a big light overhead, a
gasoline lantern that shed white luminance. The floor was uneven, and
they could not see each other, although all of them could be seen by a
guard who stood on a high pinnacle nursing a sawed–off shotgun that, he
assured them, was loaded with buckshot, of a size to kill a man.</p><p>The cavern was not large. It was a product of subterranean flow in past
centuries, high, narrow, jagged, unbeautiful, and the bats had made the
floor unpleasant.</p><p>A girl’s voice said, “Mr. Savage?”</p><p>It was Hicky.</p><p>“Yes,” Doc said. “How are you? Have they hurt you?”</p><p>“No, I’m all right—I told them I knew where the puzzle was, and they
haven’t been sure, so they haven’t touched me.” Hicky sounded cheerful.
She continued. “Say, I know what happened. I overheard some talk.”</p><p>“Happened when?”</p><p>“The night old Sebastian Casey died in New York. On his deathbed, he
told Pilatus Casey and Hubert Brackenridge where there was something
immensely valuable in Wyoming, here in these mountains. The green eagle
puzzle is the key to the location of this treasure–trove. But that
night, the night Sebastian Casey told the story, someone else heard it.
That other person killed Pilatus Casey and Hubert Brackenridge.”</p><p>“Who,” Doc asked, “is the other person?”</p><p>“The one they refer to as the boss.”</p><p>“Who is it?”</p><p>A man came to the cavern entrance and yelled, “Are those people talking
in there? If they are—shoot the next one that opens a mouth.”</p><p>The guard on the pinnacle cocked his shotgun with an elaborate gesture.
“You hear that,” he told the prisoners.</p><p>Hicky said, “Mr. Savage, I don’t know who is the boss of this.”</p><p>The guard yelled, “You hear what I said?”</p><p>“Go ahead and shoot,” Hicky said. “What’s a few hours delay?”</p><p>But they were silent after that, and nothing happened, except that,
hours afterward, the bats became thick once more overhead. They came a
few at a time, at first. Then thickening, they were a black squeaking
ribbon that flowed above, squeaking and whispering. Sinister somehow,
and nauseating. The return of the bats meant that morning was getting
close.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>Albert Panzer seemed worried when he came into the cave. He snapped at
D’Orr, “You better ride back to the Broken Circle. Something has gone
wrong. Those men we had on the trail haven’t reported sighting Monk and
Ham.”</p><p>D’Orr said, “Maybe their radio is out of whack.”</p><p>“I just talked to them.”</p><p>D’Orr obviously did not want to ride back to the Broken Circle just now.
He scratched his head, fussed around, finally said, “Listen, whether you
like it or not, I’m sticking around until we track down that puzzle and
see what we’ve got for all of our trouble.”</p><p>Panzer scowled. Finally he consented, “Oh, all right.”</p><p>They picked Doc Savage up off the floor. Two men carried him out of the
cave, having difficulty doing it. They hoisted him across a horse, and
left him there, still tied hand and foot.</p><p>“You fall off and it’s your own hard luck,” one of the men said. “These
rocks are sharp.”</p><p>They did not ride far. Only a few minutes. They came to a small flat.</p><p>The flat had, through same freak of nature, been caused halfway down a
steeply sloping mountainside. It was like a shelf. At one end, there was
green brush and a few small trees. Plainly, a spring was there.</p><p>They stopped near the spring and Doc Savage was hauled off the horse.</p><p>Panzer said, “Here is where old Pilatus Casey had his camp.”</p><p>There were plenty of signs of a prospector’s camp having been at the
spot.</p><p>Doc said, “So you figure the puzzle starts from here.”</p><p>Panzer scowled at him. “How’d you guess that?”</p><p>“This is Green Eagle Springs, isn’t it?” Doc asked dryly.</p><p>Panzer nodded suspiciously. “Just how much do you know about this
puzzle?”</p><p>“It is a rather unusual kind of a map, at least,” Doc said.</p><p>“I’ll be damned!” Panzer said. He was amazed. He said, “We brought you
down here while we followed the map. If it don’t come out right, it’s
gonna be tough on you. We’ll know it’s a fake you substituted. We’ll
work you over plenty.”</p><p>Panzer then produced the puzzle. He pried off the glass cover so that he
could manipulate the leaden feathers with a finger. He put the feathers
in holes in the eagle.</p><p>There were four holes into which leaden feathers would not fit. He left
the feathers out of those. Then, with feathers in the other positions,
he took a pencil.</p><p>He consulted the rhyme that read:</p><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Hand and eye, wandering,</td></tr><tr><td>Down and down, pondering,</td></tr><tr><td>Up and up, meandering,</td></tr><tr><td>North face,</td></tr><tr><td>Wins race.</td></tr></table><p>“I guess,” Panzer remarked, “that means you start with the eye, wander
down and down”—he scratched his head—“for two feathers, then go up
from there two feathers, meandering. That would mean rambling. Let’s
see. Mmmmmm.” His words became meaningless as he drew lines with the
pencil.</p><p>“Get it?” D’Orr demanded anxiously.</p><p>“Got it,” Panzer said excitedly. “Come on! Wait a minute! Bring Savage
along.”</p><p>By connecting the feathers as designed by the rhymed instructions, he
had produced a crude map. There was only one thing missing—the
distances to be traversed in each direction. But it developed that this
took care of itself. For, after they had scratched their heads—there
were no compass directions for the start—they decided down and down
meant downhill, so they set off in that direction, and came eventually
upon a marker, a cairn of stone.</p><p>Excited, they plunged ahead. Four men hauled Doc along, and had great
difficulty doing it.</p><p>Finally D’Orr let out a howl, pointed.</p><p>Panzer was completely speechless as he looked.</p><p>It was Tuck who said, “Well, well, the whole damned side of the mountain
is made of gold!”</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>This was a slight exaggeration. The vein was no more than six inches
thick, but the sun happened to be catching it exactly right, and it
looked immensely rich. Not pure virgin gold, but a vein of immensely
rich ore. Here and there it was obviously virgin pure.</p><p>Some of the gold had been mined. Not a great deal. The mining had been
simple work with a pick.</p><p>And it was equally obvious that, when the gold was not being mined, the
vein had been perfectly hidden by covering it with rubble and loose
stone. The pile of stone lay where it had been cleared aside.</p><p>“Hot puppies!” Panzer said ecstatically. “Here’s where old Sebastian
Casey got that gold he lived off of for most of his life. He used to
come out here every three or four years and pick out enough to do him.
He never told anybody where he got it.”</p><p>Doc Savage said, “He told on his deathbed, didn’t he?”</p><p>Panzer whirled.</p><p>Doc added, “And old Sebastian Casey made the map, of course, of the
green eagle puzzle. He had it for years, evidently, for it looks old.
Who did he give the map to? Pilatus Casey? And was Hubert Brackenridge
in the room at the time? <span class="emphasis"><em>Brackenridge must have been there.</em></span>”</p><p>Panzer’s expression was black.</p><p>“Give me a rifle,” Panzer said. “We might as well get rid of Savage
now.”</p><p>Doc had been dropped by his captors, the men who had carried him. He was
sitting down.</p><p>He had also managed something that they had not noticed—he had torn the
lining, or a fragment of it, out of his necktie and wrapped it around
the ropes which held his ankles. Then he had moistened his fingers with
saliva and dampened the necktie lining.</p><p>The lining burst into flame now. Suddenly, the result of the chemical
action of the moisture upon the treated tie lining. As water ignites the
flares used on life preservers, the thing functioned. And the flame was
abruptly violent, blue–white and fizzing, as it burned through his leg
bindings.</p><p>He managed also to jam his wrist bonds down into the flame.</p><p>Simultaneously, Monk and Ham came out of the crevice nearby, where they
had been concealed. They had machine pistols, and no kind feelings,
whatever.</p></section><footer/></body></html>