<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter 14</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch13.xhtml" title="Chapter 13"/><link rel="next" href="ch15.xhtml" title="Chapter 15"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter 14" epub:type="chapter" id="id680"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter 14</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>Lost Trick</em></h3></div></div></div><p>Two or three things were like lightning striking fast. Doc Savage came
to his feet, his ankles burned free and his wrists partially so. He
reached out and struck the stupefied Tuck, and the man dropped the
pistol he was holding.</p><p>Monk lunged suddenly at Panzer. That was a mistake. He should have
menaced the man with a machine pistol, and disarmed and tied him. But
Monk wanted to use his fists.</p><p>The first blow was not entirely effective. Panzer dodged. His foot
slipped off to the left; he lost his balance. A moment later, he was
going end over end down the almost cliff–sheer side of the mountain.</p><p>D’Orr shot Ham. Ham always insisted it was an accident; D’Orr did not
want to shoot him. It was just something that he did unconsciously.
Which might have been the truth, or might not. But D’Orr shot Ham twice.</p><p>The first bullet cut Ham’s leg open below the knee. Not seriously. The
second slug took him in the stomach. The stomach bullet was not as bad
as the other. Ham was wearing a bulletproof undergarment. But he was
knocked down.</p><p>Doc Savage, lunging wildly, reached D’Orr. His fist, coming in, actually
whistled a little—Monk testified to this—before it struck. D’Orr
dropped, his jaw in such a condition that it later took a skilled
surgeon six hours to wire the pieces of bone back into shape.</p><p>The other foes got their hands up.</p><p>“Disarm them!” Doc said. “And tie them.”</p><p>Monk made that simpler. He walked up to each man and knocked him
senseless with a hairy fist.</p><p>“I need the exercise,” Monk said cheerfully. “We danged near froze to
death here last night. We laid in that danged crack in the rock all
night.”</p><p>Doc Savage had jumped to the edge of the mountain and looked down. He
made, very briefly, his trilling sound. It was distressed, startled.</p><p>For Panzer had not been hurt by his long tumble down the steep slope; or
at least not seriously damaged. He could run. He had reached the flat,
and was pounding across it.</p><p>“A machine pistol!” Doc rapped.</p><p>Ham tossed him the weapon. But by that time Panzer had dived into a
gully. A moment later, there was a low thunder of noise.</p><p>“Horses!” Ham exploded. “They had their horses there.”</p><p>They saw a few horses an instant later. Panzer had taken a mount,
stampeded the others.</p><p>Doc said, “He’s heading toward the cave,” and began moving.</p><p>He had, a few days before when pursuing Johanna Hickman, all but outrun
the horse the young woman was riding. But that had been over a long
pull, a great distance, and it is a commonly accepted fact that a man
can outrun a horse at great distances. This race was a different
proposition. The distance was short. The cave was not far away.</p><p>There was, however, one advantage, and Doc made use of it—the steepness
of the route. The horse had to labor, at places go entirely around. The
animal, too, was inclined to be cautious, to hesitate in spite of
Panzer’s mad spurring.</p><p>Ham helped, too. From across the canyon, he fired a burst from the
machine pistol. He used explosive slugs, and they burst with hell—loud
concussions on the hillside and loosened boulders that galloped end over
end down the slope. The horse shied, and Panzer was thrown across its
neck. He hung on madly for a while, then controlled the animal. But he
had lost time.</p><p>Doc reached the cave mouth possibly a hundred and fifty yards ahead of
Panzer. He did not go directly to the cave entrance. He circled, got to
the side of it.</p><p>As he expected, the guards rushed outside to learn the meaning of the
racket Panzer was making.</p><p>Doc cut in behind them, dashed into the cave mouth.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>He had no real expectation of their not seeing him—only a slim
hope—and the hope failed. A man heard him, whirled. He howled
something. It was astounded, inarticulate. But Doc got inside the cavern
before the man got sufficiently organized to use his gun.</p><p>They killed time outside. They thought Doc was armed—if they knew at
all what to think. Panzer was screaming at them, so wild that foam flew
off his lips. That confused them all the more.</p><p>In the cave, Doc flung down alongside Renny. He worked on the knots of
the rope that held Renny’s wrists, got it loose. Renny, with his big
fists, was always a good man in a fight.</p><p>Outside, a man roared, “Come outa there or I’ll throw a stick of
dynamite in on you!”</p><p>That was patently a bluff. There had been no sign of dynamite, and no
time to get any, or cap it and fuse it.</p><p>Doc picked up a rock, started to throw it at the gasoline lantern to get
rid of the light. He changed his mind.</p><p>“Turn the others loose,” he told Renny.</p><p>He climbed up to the lantern, losing precious time, and got to it. He
dropped his coat over the lantern, made a tight bundle. The coat was
leather, inclosed most of the light. The leather smoked and smelled. But
it was dark inside the cavern.</p><p>Panzer suddenly got the guards to understand the gravity of the
situation. They came charging inside, their feet loud on the rocks. They
fired as they came, in order to clear their path.</p><p>Doc said, “Down, everyone. Watch those bullets.” His voice was a
crashing uproar.</p><p>Then he flung the gasoline lantern. He threw it, coat and all, using a
lobbing pitch as if he were putting a shot. The lantern struck the stone
above the cave entrance. It hit hard. The fuel chamber split, and
gasoline came out, spouting and rich with fumes because it was under
pressure, and ignited.</p><p>Flaming gasoline was like red tissue paper pouring down upon the first
two men to come into the cave. They roared in pain, wheeled, tried to
get back outdoors. The result was a kicking jam as they fought Panzer
and another man.</p><p>Doc piled into the melee. He ignored the flames. The blazing gasoline
was more spectacle than danger. He had somewhere banged the machine
pistol against a stone, and it would not function. He used the thing for
a club, because he had hurt his fist on D’Orr. He beat down one man.</p><p>Renny joined him. Renny was full of roaring rage, but stiff from being
tied. He could not move rapidly. A man kicked at him, and Renny took the
foot above his belt buckle. He folded to his knees. Panzer lifted a
revolver deliberately, and was aiming when Doc threw the machine pistol.
Panzer’s face lost some of its shape.</p><p>A moment later, the surviving guard was running down the steep
mountainside, yelling that he surrendered, but making no effort to stop
and do so. He stopped suddenly, got down on his knees and howled for
mercy when Monk Mayfair unexpectedly confronted him.</p><p>He howled so loudly that Ham burst out laughing.</p><p>“Looking at you sure scares ’em to death,” Ham said.</p></section><footer/></body></html>