<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter 15</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch14.xhtml" title="Chapter 14"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter 15" epub:type="chapter" id="id700"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter 15</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>The Snapper</em></h3></div></div></div><p>Johnny Littlejohn came out of the cave, rubbing his wrists where the
ropes had hurt him. He was trailed by Sheriff Gates, then by the others,
one at a time, as they were freed, or untied themselves.</p><p>Hicky said, “What happened?” and Monk told her in remarkably few words,
whereupon Hicky said, “But I don’t understand how you knew where to set
your ambush.”</p><p>“Doc had it all figured out.”</p><p>“How?”</p><p>“That puzzle—that green eagle puzzle. He found a Green Eagle Springs on
the Wyoming State map, and deduced the rest. The puzzle made a map when
you went from one lead feather to another on the eagle, beginning where
the rhyme said to begin. It was a slick map. Doc figured it out.”</p><p>“But when?” Hickey demanded. “I mean—when did he tell you to set the
trap at the mine? When did he do it without D’Orr knowing?”</p><p>“He talked to us in Mayan,” Monk said, “as we were climbing up the
mountainside, just before that ambush yesterday. He told us in English
to go back to the Broken Circle Ranch and get horses, but he told us in
Mayan to disregard those orders and go to the spot where he thought the
mine must be, and set a trap. We did. And it worked.”</p><p>Sheriff Gates was counting noses. “—and Long Tom Roberts, and Mira
Lanson——” he was saying.</p><p>Mira Lanson had obviously been mistreated. She was no longer a
supercilious young woman with a veneer of brittleness. She was crying.</p><p>All of them had at one time or another suspected that she might be
working with their enemies. But they knew better now. She had been a
victim like the others. But why, they did not yet know exactly.</p><p>Sheriff Gates was saying, “—and that leaves just one in the cave. Ben
Duck. Poor Ben—maybe he ain’t able to get out.”</p><p>Doc Savage went to the cave entrance. “Ben Duck!” he shouted. “You all
right?”</p><p>There was silence.</p><p>Then, “I’m comin’ out.”</p><p>Then he hobbled into view, wearing only one boot and limping. His
forehead was cut, and the blood had smeared his face unpleasantly.</p><p>Panzer, who was conscious on the ground, gurgled, “Damn you, Ben Duck!
If it hadn’t been for you, we’d a–put this over.”</p><p>The young man glared at Panzer. He limped around on one booted foot.</p><p>He said, “I’m goin’ back in the cave an’ get my boot. Pulled it off
while I was gettin’ outa them ropes, an’ it flew off somewhere.”</p><p>He started back into the cave.</p><p>Doc stopped him.</p><p>“Going to use the boot to kill Ben Duck?” the bronze man asked.</p><p>There was utter silence.</p><p>Monk said, “Hey! <span class="emphasis"><em>This</em></span> guy is Ben Duck. He’s the Ben Duck who got away
from this gang and came to us.”</p><p>Doc Savage shook his head slightly. “He is the man who came to us and
tried, aided by D’Orr, to sell us a bill of goods about being Ben Duck.”</p><p>The young man who was not Ben Duck moved suddenly, but not suddenly
enough. Doc Savage managed to trap him, and jammed him into Renny’s
willing arms.</p><p>Renny slapped him very hard with a huge hand. “I dunno who you are,”
Renny said, “but I’m gonna treat you unkind if you don’t stand still.”</p><p>Mira Lanson spoke up shrilly. “I know who he is,” she said.</p><p>“You do?” They stared at her.</p><p>“He’s the man behind this whole thing,” Mira Lanson said.</p><p>Then Mira Lanson’s arms hung down and she piled on the earth in a faint.</p><p>Ben Duck was unconscious when they found him and brought him out of the
cave. It was evident that the false Ben Duck had been trying to kill the
real one with the missing boot when Doc’s shout had interrupted him and
brought him out of the cave earlier. The real Ben Duck, however, was not
in serious condition.</p><p>Probably he was not in as serious a condition as was Hicky for a few
moments, until she found out Ben would survive. Hicky did not become
hysterical. She did grow pale and look so utterly concerned and worried
that there was no doubt in the mind of any observer that Hicky was in
love with Ben Duck.</p><p>Long Tom Roberts turned suddenly and walked away. His expression was
strained. He had taken an enormous liking to Hicky; how enormous a
liking he just now realized.</p><p>Monk understood. He followed Long Tom and put a hand on the electrical
wizard’s thin shoulder. “Tough break,” Monk said. “But you’ll get over
it. Why, I know a little blonde who will——”</p><p>“How would you like a bust in the nose?” Long Tom asked hoarsely.</p><p>Monk backed away and left him alone.</p><p>“These guys who only fall in love once a year,” Monk muttered. “Phooey!”</p><p>Big–fisted Renny was asking Doc Savage, “What will we do about that gold
vein? The claim isn’t registered, is it?”</p><p>“There is no registered claim. It is not even posted,” Doc said.</p><p>“That means there is no claim, don’t it? Whoever files on the gold vein
gets it.”</p><p>Doc Savage said quietly, “Mira Lanson has a moral claim to a share of
it, because of inheritance. We might file on it, I would suggest, and
effect a division.”</p><p>“What kind of a division?” Renny asked.</p><p>“Say in four parts. One part to Hicky, here, one to Ben Duck, one to
Mira Lanson, and the fourth to a charity which we will all agree upon.”</p><p>Ben Duck asked, “Say, where do <span class="emphasis"><em>you</em></span> gents come in? Where is the profit
in it for you?”</p><p>“Oh, we got the fun out of it,” Renny told him.</p><p>Ben Duck looked as if he did not understand that. He never did
understand it, either.</p><p class="center">*        *        *        *        *</p><p>Ham scratched the back of his neck and said thoughtfully, “There is one
point I do not understand. Back there in New York. Why was Hubert
Brackenridge’s body stolen from the cemetery, and burned?”</p><p>Doc said quietly, “To keep us from identifying it.”</p><p>“Then it wasn’t Hubert Brackenridge’s body?”</p><p>“No. It may have been the body of some poor devil they murdered—or one
they bought from a medical school supply concern. We may never know.”</p><p>“At any rate,” the bronze man continued after a moment, “it was the body
they placed in the car for the accident.”</p><p>“But two dentists who knew Hubert Brackenridge identified the body as
his.”</p><p>“Two <span class="emphasis"><em>fake</em></span> dentists,” Doc said. “They answered the description of Tuck
and another man in that gang out here, if I recall.”</p><p>Ham said, “But we talked to the genuine dentists, and they said they
identified the body at the undertaker’s as Hubert Brackenridge.”</p><p>“They made the identification at the undertaker’s—where Hubert
Brackenridge probably slipped into the coffin for the deception,” Doc
said. “They hired the undertaker to help, probably. The fake dentists
made the identification at the accident scene. It was merely a clever
device they used in case anyone took the trouble to check back.”</p><p>“Why,” asked Ham, “would Hubert Brackenridge take the trouble of faking
his own death?”</p><p>“Because of what Miss Lanson knew about him, perhaps,” Doc said.</p><p>“But what does Miss Lanson—or did she—know about Hubert Brackenridge?”</p><p>Doc suggested, “We might ask her.”</p><p>They went over to Mira Lanson. She was conscious.</p><p>“Who was behind all this?” Doc asked her.</p><p>“Hubert Brackenridge,” she said.</p><p>Doc turned and indicated the man who had pretended to be Ben Duck. “Who
is that?” he asked.</p><p>“Hubert Brackenridge,” Mira Lanson said.</p></section><footer/></body></html>