<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>1: A Chronological Note</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch01.xhtml" title="Book the First"/><link rel="next" href="ch01s02.xhtml" title="2: How the Idea and Hope of the Modern World State First Appeared"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="1: A Chronological Note" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646418200"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">1: A Chronological Note</h2></div></div></div><p>In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries the story of mankind upon
this planet undergoes a change of phase.  It broadens out.  It
unifies.  It ceases to be a tangle of more and more interrelated
histories and it becomes plainly and consciously one history.
There is a complete confluence of racial, social and political
destinies.  With that a vision of previously unsuspected
possibilities opens to the human imagination.  And that vision
brings with it an immense readjustment of ideas.</p><p>The first phase of that readjustment is necessarily destructive.
The conceptions of life and obligation that have served and
satisfied even the most vigorous and intelligent personalities
hitherto, conceptions that were naturally partial, sectarian and
limited, begin to lose, decade by decade, their credibility and
their directive force.  They fade, they become attenuated.  It is
an age of increasing mental uneasiness, of forced beliefs,
hypocrisy, cynicism, abandon and impatience.  What has been
hitherto a final and impenetrable background of conviction in the
rightness of the methods of behaviour characteristic of the
national or local culture of each individual, becomes, as it were,
a dissolving and ragged curtain.  Behind it appear, vague and dim
at first, and refracted and distorted by the slow dissolution of
the traditional veils, the intimations of the type of behaviour
necessary to that single world community in which we live to–day.</p><p>Until the Chronological Institute has completed its present labours
of revision and defined the cardinal dates in our social evolution,
it is best to refer our account of the development of man's mind
and will throughout this hectic period of human experience to the
clumsy and irrelevant computation by centuries before and after the
Christian Era, that is still current.  As we have explained more
fully in a previous book [Nothing of this is to be found in Raven's
notes.—ED.], we inherit this system of historical pigeonholes from
Christendom; that arbitrary chequerwork of hundred–year blocks was
imposed upon the entire Mediterranean and Atlantic literatures for
two thousand years, and it still distorts the views of history of
all but the alertest minds.  The young student needs to be
constantly on his guard against its false divisions.  As Peter
Lightfoot has remarked, we talk of the "eighteenth century", and we
think of fashions and customs and attitudes that are characteristic
of a period extending from the Treaty of Westphalia in C.E.
[Christian Era] 1642 to the Napoleonic collapse in C.E. 1815; we
talk of the "nineteenth century", and the pictures and images
evoked are those of the gas–lighting and steam–transport era, from
after the distressful years of post–Napoleonic recovery to the
immense shock of the World War in C.E. 1914.  The phase "twentieth
century", again, calls forth images of the aeroplane, the
electrification of the world and so forth; but an aeroplane was an
extremely rare object in the air until 1914 (the first got up in
1905), and the replacement of the last steam railway train and the
last steamship was not completed until the nineteen–forties.  It is
a tiresome waste of energy to oblige each generation of young minds
to learn first of all in any unmeaning pattern of centuries and
then to correct that first crude arrangement, so that this long–
needed revision of our chronology is one that will be very welcome
to every teacher.  Then from the very outset he or she will be able
to block out the story of our race in significant masses.</p><p>The Chronological Institute is setting about its task with a
helpful publicity, inviting discussion from every angle.  It is
proposing to divide up as much of the known history of our race as
is amenable to annual reckoning, into a series of eras of unequal
length.  Naturally the choice of these eras is the cause of some
extremely lively and interesting interchanges; most of us have our
own private estimates of the values of events, and many issues
affecting the earlier civilized communities remain in a state of
animated unsettlement.  Our chronology is now fairly sure as to the
year for most important events in the last 4,000 years, and, thanks
largely to the minute and patient labours of the Selwyn–Cornford
Committee for Alluvial Research, to the decade for another hundred
centuries.  So far as the last 3,000 years are concerned, little
doubt remains now that the main dividing points to be adopted will
be FIRST the epoch of Alexander and the Hellenic conquests which
will begin the phase of the great Helleno–Latin monetary
imperialism in the western world, the Helleno–Latin Era.  This will
commence at the crossing of the Hellespont by Alexander the Great
and end either with the Battle of the Yarmuk (636 C.E.) or the
surrender of Jerusalem to the Caliph Omar (638 C.E.).  NEXT will
come the epoch of Moslem and Mongol pressure on the West which
opened the era of feudal Christendom vis–à–vis with feudal Islam:
the Era of Asiatic Predominance.  This ends with the Battle of
Lepanto (1571 C.E.).  Then THIRDLY there will follow the epoch of
the Protestant and the Catholic (counter) Reformations, which
inaugurated the era of the competing sovereign states with
organized standing armies: the Era of European Predominance, or, as
it may also be called, the Era of National Sovereignty.  Finally
comes the catastrophe of the World War of 1914, when the outward
drive of the new economic methods the Atlantic civilizations had
developed gave way under the internal stresses of European
nationalism.  That war, and its long–drawn sequelae, released the
human mind to the potentialities and dangers of an imperfectly
Europeanized world—a world which had unconsciously become one
single interlocking system, while still obsessed by the Treaty of
Westphalia and the idea of competing sovereign states.  This mental
shock and release marks the beginning of the Era of the Modern
State.  The opening phase of this latest era is this Age of
Frustration with which we are now about to deal.  That is the first
age of the Era of the Modern State.  A second age, but not a new
era, began with the Declaration of Mégève which was accepted by the
general commonsense of mankind forty–seven years ago.  This closed
the Age of Frustration, which lasted therefore a little short of a
century and a half.</p><p>The date upon the title–page for the first publication of this
History is C.E. 2106.  Before many editions have been exhausted
that will be changed to Modern Era (M.E.) 192 or M.E. 189 or M.E.
187, according to whether our chronologists decide upon 1914, the
date of the outbreak of the Great War, or 1917, the beginning of
the social revolution in Russia, or 1919, the signing of the Treaty
of Versailles, as the conclusive opening of the Age of Frustration
and the conflict for world unity.  The second date seems at present
to be the more practicable one.</p><p>In C.E. 1914 the concept of an organized world order did not seem
to be within the sphere of human possibility; in C.E. 1919 it was
an active power in a steadily increasing proportion of human
brains.  The Modern State had been conceived.  It was germinating.
One system, the Soviet system in Russia, was already claiming to be
a world system.  To most of the generation which suffered it, the
Great War seemed to be purely catastrophe and loss; to us who see
those hideous years in perspective and in proportion to the general
dulness and baseness of apprehension out of which that conflict
arose, the destruction of life and substance, unprecedented as they
were, has none of that overwhelming quality.  We see it as a
clumsy, involuntary release from outworn assumptions by their
reduction to tragic absurdity, and as a practically unavoidable
step therefore in the dialectic of human destiny.</p></section><footer/></body></html>