<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>8: The Impulse to Abolish War; the Episode of the Ford Peace Ship</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch01s07.xhtml" title="7: The Great War of 1914-1918"/><link rel="next" href="ch01s09.xhtml" title="9: The Direct Action of the Armament Industries in Maintaining War Stresses"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="8: The Impulse to Abolish War; the Episode of the Ford Peace Ship" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646515880"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">8: The Impulse to Abolish War; the Episode of the Ford Peace Ship</h2></div></div></div><p>One quaint expedition, grotesque and childish and yet an augury of
greater things to come, flits very illuminatingly across the
dreadful record of these war years.  It is the voyage of a
passenger steamship from New York to Norway.  The dark curtains of
oblivion fall in heavier and heavier folds before the thundering
battleships of the twilit Battle of Jutland; their forgotten names
sink back into a vague general impression of huge flame–spouting
masses that rush through smoke and mist to their fate; only a
specialist can tell us now whether the Lützow or the Friedrich der
Grosse, the Lion, or the Iron Duke, the Vanguard or the Colossus
perished with its complement of men or staggered out of that
battle.  They have become monstrous irrelevances.  There is nothing
but their size, and the smashing and drowning of hundreds of men in
them, to make them more significant to us now than an exploding
casket of fireworks.  But steaming its way across the Atlantic a
few months before Jutland was fought came this other ship, a
passenger boat of the Scandinavian–American line, the Oscar II,
whose voyage remains to this day important and interesting, because
in the most simple and artless fashion it mingled the new
conceptions of life that were coming into being, with all the
prevalent weaknesses of the time.  The Oscar II is better known in
history as the Peace Ship of Henry Ford.  It is a gleam of tragic
comedy amidst the universal horror.</p><p>This Henry Ford was a very natural–minded mechanical genius,
without much education or social sophistication, a great friend of,
and kindred spirit with, that Edison whose career has been traced
in the chapter of human history dealing with the development and
exploitations of inventions at the close of the nineteenth and the
beginning of the twentieth century.  Born and brought up in a
period of economic expansion, Ford took economic expansion as if it
were a necessity inherent in things, and never began to doubt
continual progress until he was a man of over seventy.  That was
his good fortune.  That gave him the confidence to design an
automobile as sound and good and cheap as could be done at that
time, and to organize the mass production of his pattern with
extraordinary energy and skill, because his mind was untroubled by
the thought that there could be a limit to the number of possible
purchasers.  He marketed his "flivver", or "tin lizzie", as it was
affectionately called, in enormous quantities, and in consequence
he revolutionized the road transport and town planning of America.
He changed the shape of every growing town by enabling the small
householder to live further from the work and business centre than
had ever been possible before.  He did more than any other single
man to drive the horse not only from the road but, by making farm
tractors, from the fields.  He created factories at Dearborn that
even to–day seem vast.  He became enormously rich and an
outstanding "character" in the world, and particularly in America.
And he remained curiously simple and direct in his outlook upon
life.</p><p>The first effect of the Great War upon him, as on a vast proportion
of the English–speaking peoples, was incredulous amazement.  He had
known there were armies and sovereign nations in the world, but
apparently he had never supposed they would fight.  He felt there
must be some mistake.  He exchanged views with other Americans in a
similar phase of astonishment.  By the beginning of 1915 they had
accumulated a sufficient mass of evidence from the belligerent
countries to convince them that great masses of people in these
countries were as amazed and as anxious to end the widening
bloodshed and brutalization as the neutral onlookers.  There had
been deputations to the President (President Wilson), who was at
that time, in harmony with his country, highly pacificist, and
there was a widespread ambition that the United States should evoke
some sort of permanent arbitration council alone, or in concert
with the other Powers still neutral, which should stand, so to
speak, on the edge of the battlefield and continue to offer its
mediatory services to the warring governments until they were
accepted.  There was the suggestion of a deputation to Europe to
further this idea, and the question arose how should it go across
the Atlantic.  Ford offered to charter a ship to take it.</p><p>Then his peculiar imagination seized upon his own offer.  He would
make this ship a spectacular ship; it should be the "Peace Ship".
It should take a complement of chosen delegates to Europe in such a
blaze of publicity that at its coming the war would be, as it were,
arrested, to look at it.  Its mere appearance would recall
infuriated Europe to its senses.  "I want to get those boys out of
the trenches," said Ford.  "They don't want to fight, and would be
only too glad to shake hands with each other."  At the back of his
mind there seems to have been an idea of calling a general strike
at the fronts.  "Out of the trenches by Christmas, never to return
again," was his brief speech at a public meeting in Washington in
November.  All sorts of eminent and energetic people were invited
to join the mission.  He sought the overt approval of the
President, but the President was far too seasoned a politician to
squander his publicity upon this "gesture" of Henry Ford's.  He was
meditating a gesture of his own later on.</p><p>American life at that time had its conspicuous popular stars, who
embodied its ideals of greatness and goodness.  Some of them are
still for various reasons remembered by the historian, Jane Addams
and Thomas Edison, for example, William Jennings Bryan (the "Last
Creationist") and Luther Burbank.  These names are still to be
found even in the Lower School Encyclopædia.  Ford tried to include
them all in one meteoric shipload.  The governors of all the states
in the Union were also invited, groups of representative university
students, and so on.  The Historical Collection at Atacama has
gathered all the surviving originals or replicas of Ford's
invitations, and the replies in which these outstanding individuals
hesitated over or evaded his proposals.  Several were only
prevented by sudden attacks of ill–health at the very last moment
from joining him.  And there was a number of newspaper reporters,
cinema operators and other photographers, stenographers, typists,
translators, interpreters, baggage masters and publicity agents who
made no trouble about coming.  A certain Madame Rosika Schwimmer,
an Hungarian lady, gleams forth and vanishes again from history as
the organizing spirit of this selection.  A vast multitude of
adventurers and crazy people offered to assist when Ford's project
was made public, and many were only prevented with the utmost
difficulty from coming aboard the Oscar II.</p><p>There is still material for a great writer in the details of that
expedition, but our interest here is neither with the expedition as
a whole nor with Ford or the other persons concerned in it as
personalities, but with this idea that flamed and faded, this idea
of 'an appeal against war to human sanity'.  And with the
vicissitudes of that idea.</p><p>The first thing to note is that it evoked response, and a very wide
response.  Eminent people, both in America and Europe, with their
popularity to consider, found it advisable to be sympathetic, even
if unhelpful.  President Wilson, for example, was sympathetic but
unhelpful.  All the pretentious weathercocks of the Western World
swung round towards it.  We have every indication indeed of a very
considerable drive towards a world pax in these years.  But
presently the weathercocks began to waver and swing away.</p><p>Why did they waver?  From the first there was a sustained,
malignant antagonism to the project.  This grew in force and
vigour.  The American Press, and in its wake the European Press,
set itself to magnify and distort every weakness, every slight
absurdity, in the expedition and to invent further weaknesses and
absurdities.  A campaign of ridicule began, so skilful and
persistent that it stripped away one blushing celebrity after
another from the constellation, and smothered the essential sanity
of the project in their wilting apologies.  While Ford and his
surviving missioners discussed and discoursed on their liner, the
newspaper men they had brought with them concocted lies and absurd
stories about their host—as though they were under instructions.</p><p>We know now they were under instructions.  The Historical Documents
Series makes this perfectly plain.</p><p>As our students disentangle strand after strand of that long hidden
story, we realize more and more clearly the tortuous dishonesty,
the confused double–mindedness, of the times.  The export trade of
the United States was flourishing under war conditions as it had
never flourished before.  Munitions of every sort were being sold
at enormously enhanced prices to the belligerents.  Such great
banking houses as Morgan and Co. were facilitating the financial
subjugation of Europe to America, through debts for these supplies.
It is clear that American finance and American Big Business had not
foreseen this.  They had no exceptional foresight.  But suddenly
they found themselves in a position of great advantage, and by all
their traditions they were bound to make use of that advantage.
And Ford in his infinite artlessness, "butting in", as they said,
"on things that were not his business", was setting out to destroy
this favourable state of affairs.</p><p>There was just enough plausibility in this endeavour to make it
seem dangerous.  Ford could not be ignored; his available publicity
was too great for that.  He was by no means beneath contempt; so he
had to be made contemptible.  With an earnestness worthy of a
better cause, the American Press was launched against him.  And it
was one of the strange traditions of the American Press that a
newsman should have no scruples.  The ordinary reporter was a moral
invert taking a real pride in his degradation.  No expedient was
too mean, no lie, no trick too contemptible if only it helped
thwart and disillusion Ford.</p><p>And they did thwart and disillusion him.  They got him wrong with
himself.  This half–baked man of genius, deserted by his friends,
lost confidence in his project.  He began to suspect his allies and
believe his enemies.</p><p>We have to accept the evidence preserved for us, but even with that
evidence before us, some of the details of that Press campaign
appear incredible.  There are a hundred gross files of newspaper
cuttings at Atacama, and some of the most amazing are reproduced in
the selected Historical Documents.  The reporters and writers, who
were abroad as Ford's guests, invented and sent home by wireless
fantastic reports of free fights among the members of the mission,
of disputes among the leaders, of Ford being chained to his bed by
his secretary, of mutinies and grotesque happenings.  Ford was told
of and could have prevented these radio messages being sent—it was
his ship for the time being—but a kind of fanaticism for free
opinion—even if in practice that meant free lying—restrained him.
"Let them do their darnedest," he said, still valiant.  "Our work
will speak for itself."</p><p>But presently he caught the influenza, a lowering disease long
since extinct but very rife in that period and, under clumsy
medical attention of the day, he arrived in Europe deflated and
tired, physically and morally, prepared now to believe that there
was something essentially foolish in the whole affair.  He had been
drenched in ridicule beyond his powers of resistance, and he was
giving way.  He gave way.</p><p>"Guess I had better go home to mother," said Mr. Ford, sick in bed
in Christiania, and kept to his room, though all Norway was agog to
greet and cheer him.</p><p>But his movement went on by the inertia it had gained.  His
delegation was received with great enthusiasm in Norway and
subsequently in Sweden, Switzerland, Denmark and Holland, those
small sovereign European states which contrived so dexterously to
keep out of the conflict to the end.  People in those countries
were evidently only too eager to believe that this novel
intervention might help to end the war.  If Ford was discouraged,
some of his associates were of more persistent material.  They held
great public meetings in Sweden, Holland and Switzerland, and the
repercussion of their activities certainly had a heartening effect
on the peace movement in Germany and Britain.  They contrived to
get speech with a number of politicians and statesmen, and they
roused the watchful hostility of the German and British War
authorities—for the military chiefs of both sides regarded this
mission very properly as an attack on war morale.  A Neutral
Conference for Continuous Mediation came into being—very
precarious being—in Stockholm.  It is claimed that it checked a
movement to bring Sweden into the war on the side of the Germans.</p><p>Then gradually the Ford Organization for Peace lost prominence.  It
was overshadowed by greater movements towards negotiation, and more
particularly by the large uncertain gestures of President Wilson,
who, re–elected as "the man who kept the United States out of the
war," brought his people from a phase of hypocritical pacificism
and energetic armament into the war in 1917.  Before that
culmination the Peace Ship bladder had collapsed altogether.  Its
last typist and photographer and clerk had been paid off, and Ford
himself was already doing all that was humanly possible to draw a
blanket of oblivion over that unforgettable Peace Ship.  But the
records have been too much for him.</p><p>He had not led his expeditionary force in Europe, even nominally,
for more than five weeks.  He had kept to his Norwegian hotel,
avoided his more enthusiastic associates, started a vigorous
reduction of his financial commitments, and finally bolted home.
He deserted.  He left his hotel at Christiania, stealthily, at five
o'clock in the morning, and, in spite of the pleadings of those of
his party who, warned at the last minute, tumbled out of bed to
protest, he got away.  Before the year was out he had ceased even
financial support, and the various men and women who had abandoned
careers and positions and faced ridicule and odium in complete
faith in his simplicity were left to find their way back to their
former niches or discover fresh ones.</p><p>Now what had happened to his great idea?  What strange reversal of
motive had occurred in the brain and heart of this Peace Crusader?
There the curious historian must needs speculate, for that brain
and heart have gone now beyond all closer scrutiny.</p><p>It has to be noted first that while the Peace Ship was on the
Atlantic something very significant was going on at Washington.
The swiftly growing munition industries of America had discovered
that a home market for their products, a home market of superior
solvency, might be added to the vast demands of the fighting
nations overseas.  America, it was argued, might keep out of the
war—well and good—but nevertheless America must be "prepared."
The United States must arm.  The President had weighed this
proposal with a due regard for the votes and Press support that
would come to him at the next election; he had weighed it very
carefully as became a politician, and after some resistance he
consented that America should be "prepared".  Munitions should be
assembled, troops should be drilled.  Flags began to wave—and the
United States flag was a very intoxicating one—and drums and
trumpets to sound.  Military excitement stirred through that vast
pacific population and rose.</p><p>And Ford had a mighty industrial plant hitherto engaged in pouring
out motor–cars and agricultural material, but capable of rapid
adaptation to the production of war material.  It was his creation;
it was his embodiment.  It was all that made him visibly different
from any other fellow in the street.  His friends and family had
certainly watched his abandonment of business for world affairs
with profound misgiving.  It may have been plain to them before it
was plain to him, that if he stood out of this "preparedness"
movement as he threatened to do, other great plants would arise
beside his own, to produce war material indeed at first, but
capable when the war was over of a reverse transformation into
great factories for the mass production of motorcars and the like.
In France this transference from munitions to automobiles was
actually foreseen and carried out by the Citröen organization.  It
is impossible that this prospect could have escaped Ford.</p><p>But in his haste he had declared himself against preparedness.  He
had threatened to hoist an "international flag" over his works in
the place of the Stars and Stripes….</p><p>It is clear that in that one lively brain all the main forces of
the time were at work.  It had responded vividly and generously to
the new drive towards a worldpax.  Lochner (America's Don Quixote,
1924) reports him thus on his sailing from New York:</p><p>"Have you any last word to say?" a journalist enquired.</p><p>"Yes," he replied.  "Tell the people to cry peace and fight
preparedness."</p><p>"What if this expedition fails?" ventured another.</p><p>"If this expedition fails I'll start another," he flashed without a
moment's hesitation.</p><p>"People say you are not sincere," commented a third….</p><p>"We've got peace–talk going now, and I'll pound it to the end."</p><p>And afterwards came those second thoughts.  When, in 1917, the
United States entered the war, the Peace Ship was a stale old joke
and the vast Ford establishments were prepared and ready for the
production of munitions.</p><p>Ford was a compendium of his age.  That is why we give him this
prominence in our history.  The common man of the twentieth century
was neither a pacifist nor a war–monger.  He was both—and Ford was
just a common man made big by accident and exceptional energy.</p><p>The main thread in the history of the twentieth century is
essentially the drama of the indecisions manifested in their
elementary plainness by Ford on board his Peace Ship.  That voyage
comes therefore like a tin–whistle solo by way of overture, to the
complex orchestration of human motive in the great struggle for
human unity that lay ahead.</p></section><footer/></body></html>