<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>4: Early Attempts to Understand and Deal With These Disproportions; the Criticisms of Karl Marx and Henry George</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch01s03.xhtml" title="3: The Accumulating Disproportions of the Old Order"/><link rel="next" href="ch01s05.xhtml" title="5: The Way in Which Competition and Monetary Inefficiency Strained the Old Order"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="4: Early Attempts to Understand and Deal With These Disproportions; the Criticisms of Karl Marx and Henry George" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646472700"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">4: Early Attempts to Understand and Deal With These Disproportions; the Criticisms of Karl Marx and Henry George</h2></div></div></div><p>There are, however, one or two exceptions to this general absence
of diagnosis in the affairs of the nineteenth and twentieth century
of the Christian Era, which even the student of general history
cannot ignore.  Prominent among them is the analysis and forecasts
of economic development made by Karl Marx and his associates.</p><p>In any case Marxism would have demanded our attention as a curious
contemporary realization of the self–destroying elements in the
business methods of the nineteenth century; but its accidental
selection as the ostensible creed of revolutionary Russia after the
Tzarist collapse gives it an almost primary importance in the
history of kinetic ideas.</p><p>Karl Marx (1818–1883) was the son of a christianized Jewish lawyer
of Treves, of considerable social pretensions; he had an excellent
university career at Bonn and Berlin, assimilated the radical
thought of his time and became the lifelong friend of the far more
modest and gifted Friedrich Engels (1820–1895), a Lancashire calico
dealer.  Under the inspiration of Engels and the English socialist
movement of Robert Owen, Marx elaborated the theory of economic
development which is the substance of Marxism.  It is embodied in a
huge unfinished work, Das Kapital, and summarized in a Communist
Manifesto (1848) drawn up by Engels and himself.  (These, and
indeed all his writings, together with an able digest and summary,
are to be found in the Library of Historical Thought, vols. 17252–
9.)  His chief merit lies in his clear recognition of the ultimate
dependence of social and political forms and reactions upon
physical necessity.  ("The Materialist Conception of History".)
His chief fault was his insane hatred of the middle classes
(bourgeoisie), due mainly to his pose as a needy aristocrat and
embittered, it may be, by his material and intellectual dependence
on the trader Engels.  His own attempts to apply his theories by
conspiracy and political action were inept and futile.  He died in
London a disappointed and resentful man, quite unaware of the
posthumous fame that awaited his doctrines.  It was the
organization of his followers into the disciplined Communist Party
and the modernization of his doctrines by the genius of Lenin that
made his name a cardinal one in history.</p><p>It is interesting to consider his general propositions now in the
light of accomplished events and note the hits and misses of those
heroic speculations—heroic, that is to say, measured by the mental
courage of the time.</p><p>Nowadays every schoolboy knows that the essential and permanent
conflict in life is a conflict between the past and the future,
between the accomplished past and the forward effort.  He is made
to realize this conflict in his primary biological course.  Therein
he comes to see and in part to understand the continual automatic
struggle of the thing achieved, to hold the new, the new–born
individual, the new–born idea, the widening needs of the species,
in thrall.  This conflict he is shown runs through all history.  In
the old classical mythology Saturn, the Conservative head–god,
devoured all his children until at last one escaped to become Jove.
And of how Jove bound Prometheus in his turn every lover of Shelley
can tell.  We need only refer the student to the recorded struggles
in the histories of Republican Rome and Judæa between debtor and
creditor; to the plebeian Secessions of the former and the year of
Jubilee of the latter; to the legend of Joseph in Egypt (so richly
interpreted now through the minute study of contemporary Egyptian
documents by the students of the Breasted Commemoration Fund); to
the English Statute of Mortmain; to Austen Livewright's lucid study
of Bankruptcy Through the Ages (1979), to remind him of this
perennial struggle of life against the creditor and the dead hand.
But Marx, like most of his contemporaries, was profoundly ignorant
of historical science, and addicted to a queer "dialectic" devised
by the pseudo–philosopher Hegel; his ill–equipped mind apprehended
this perennial antagonism only in terms of the finance of the
industrial production about him; the entrepreneur, the capitalist,
became the villain of his piece, using the prior advantage of his
capital to appropriate the "surplus value" of production, so that
his share of purchasing power became more and more disproportionately
great.</p><p>Marx seems never to have distinguished clearly between restrictive
and productive possessions, which nowadays we recognize as a
difference of fundamental importance.  Exploitation for profit and
strangulation for dominance, the radical son and the conservative
father, were all one to him.  And his proposals for expropriating
the profit–seeking "Capitalist" were of the vaguest; he betrayed no
conception whatever of the real psychology of economic activities,
and he had no sense of the intricate organization of motives needed
if the coarse incentive of profit was to be superseded.  Indeed, he
had no practical capacity at all, and one is not surprised to learn
that for his own part he never earned a living.  He claimed all the
privileges of a prophet and all the laxity and indolence of a
genius, and he never even completed his great book.</p><p>It was the far abler and finer–minded Lenin (1870–1924, in power in
Russia after 1917), rather than Marx, who gave a practical
organization to the revolutionary forces of Communism and made the
Communist Party for a time, until Stalin overtook it, the most
vital creative force in the world.  The essential intellectual
difference between these two men is explained very clearly by Max
Eastman (1895–1980), whose compact and scholarly Marx and Lenin is
still quite readable by the contemporary student.  In his time
Lenin had to pose as the disciple and exponent of Marx; it was only
later that criticism revealed the subtle brilliance of his effort
to wrest a practical commonsense out of the time–worn doctrines of
the older prophet.</p><p>Another nineteenth–century writer, with perhaps a clearer
realization of the strangulating effect of restrictive property as
distinguished from the stimulating effect of exploitation, was
Henry George (1839–1897), an American printer who rose to great
popularity as a writer upon economic questions.  He saw the life of
mankind limited and dwarfed by the continual rise in rents.  His
naïve remedy was to tax the landowner, as Marx's naïve remedy was
to expropriate the capitalist, and just as Marx never gave his
disciples the ghost of an idea for a competent administration of
the expropriated economic plant and resources of the world, so
Henry George never indicated how, in the world of implacable
individualism he advocated, the taxing authority was to find a use
for its ever–increasing tax receipts.</p><p>We can smile to–day at the limitations of these early pioneers.
But we smile only because we live later than they did, and are two
centuries and more to the good in our experience.  We owe them
enormous gratitude for the valiant disinterestedness of their life
work.</p><p>Our debt is on the whole rather for what they got rid of than for
what they did.  The broad outlines of the world's economic life are
fairly simple as we see them frankly exposed to–day, but these men
were born into an atmosphere of uncriticized usage, secrecy, time–
honoured misconceptions, fetishisms, working fictions—which often
worked very badly—and almost insane suppressions of thought and
statement.  The very terms they were obliged to use were question–
begging terms; the habitual assumptions of the world they addressed
were crooked and only to be apprehended with obliquity and
inconsistency.  They were forcing their minds towards the
expression of reality through an intricate mental and moral tangle.
They destroyed the current assumption of permanence in established
institutions and usages, and though that seems a small thing to us
now, it was a profoundly important release at the time.  The
infantile habit of assuming the fixity of the Thing that Is was
almost universal in their day.</p><p>The Marxist doctrines did at least indicate that a term was
necessarily set to economic development through profit–seeking, by
the concentration of controlling ownership, by the progressive
relative impoverishment of larger and larger sections of the world
population and by the consequent final dwindling of markets.  The
rapid coagulation of human activities after 1928 C.E. was widely
recognized as a confirmation of the Marxian forecast, and by one of
those rapid mental leaps characteristic of the time, as a complete
endorsement of the Communist pretension to have solved the social
problem.</p><p>Unembarrassed as we are now by the mental clutter of our
forefathers, the fundamental processes at work during the
distressful years of the third and fourth decade of the century
appear fairly simple.  We know that it is a permanent condition of
human well–being that the general level of prices should never
fall, and we have in the Currency Council a fairly efficient and
steadily improving world–organ to ensure that end.  A dollar, as we
know it to–day, means practically the same thing in goods,
necessities and satisfactions from one year's end to another.  Its
diminution in value is infinitesimal.  No increase is ever allowed
to occur.  For the owner of an unspent dollar there is neither un–
earnt increment nor unmerited loss.  As the productive energy of
our species rises, the dollar value of the total wealth is arranged
to increase steadily in proportion, and neither is the creditor
enriched nor robbed of his substantial expectation nor the debtor
confronted with payments beyond his powers.</p><p>There remains no way now of becoming passively wealthy.  Gambling
was ruthlessly eradicated under the Air Dictatorship and has never
returned.  Usury ranks with forgery as a monetary offence.  Money
is given to people to get what they want and not as a basis for
further acquisition, and we realize that the gambling spirit is a
problem for the educationist and mental expert.  It implies a
fundamental misunderstanding of life.  We have neither speculators,
shareholders, private usurers or rent lords.  All these
"independent" types have vanished from the earth.  Land and its
natural resources are now owned and administered either directly or
by delegation, by a hierarchy of administrative boards representing
our whole species; there are lease–holding cultivators and
exploiting corporations with no right to sublet, but there is no
such thing as a permanent private ownership of natural resources
making an automatic profit by the increment of rent.  And since
there is, and probably always will be now, a continual advance in
our average individual productive efficiency by which the whole
community profits, there follows a continual extension of our
collective enterprises, a progressive release of leisure and a
secular raising of the standard of individual life, to compensate
for what would otherwise be a progressive diminution in the number
of brains and hands needed to carry on the work of the world.
Human society, so long as productive efficiency increases, is
OBLIGED to raise its standards of consumption and extend its
activities year by year, or collapse.  And if its advance does not
go on it will drop into routine, boredom, viciousness and decay.
Steadfastly the quantity and variety of things MUST increase.</p><p>These imperative conditions, which constitute the A B C of the
existing order, seem so obvious to–day, that it is with difficulty
we put ourselves in the place of these twentieth century folk to
whom they were strange and novel.  They were not yet humanized en
masse; they still had the mentality of the "struggle for
existence".  It is only by a considerable mental effort, and after
a careful study of the gradual evolution of the civilized mentality
out of the chaotic impulses and competition of an originally very
unsocial animal, that we can even begin to see matters with the
eyes of our predecessors of a century and a half ago.</p></section><footer/></body></html>