<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>9: The Direct Action of the Armament Industries in Maintaining War Stresses</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch01s08.xhtml" title="8: The Impulse to Abolish War; the Episode of the Ford Peace Ship"/><link rel="next" href="ch01s10.xhtml" title="10: Versailles: Seed Bed of Disasters"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="9: The Direct Action of the Armament Industries in Maintaining War Stresses" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646532960"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">9: The Direct Action of the Armament Industries in Maintaining War Stresses</h2></div></div></div><p>We must now say something about the direct activities of the
hypertrophied "armament firms" in bringing about and sustaining the
massacres of the Great War.  A proper understanding of that
influence is essential if the stresses and martyrdoms of the middle
years of the twentieth century are to be understood.</p><p>These "armament firms" were an outcome of the iron and steel
industry, which in a few score years between 1700 and 1850 grew up—
no man objecting—from a modest activity of artisans to relatively
gigantic possibilities of production.  This industry covered the
world with a network of railways, and produced iron and then steel
steamships to drive the wooden sailing ships off the seas.  And at
an early stage (all this is traced in full detail in Luke Zimmern's
Entwickelung und Geschichte von Kruppismus, 1913; Hist. Doc.
394112) it turned its attention to the weapons in the world.</p><p>In a perpetual progress in the size and range of great guns, in a
vast expansion of battleships that were continually scrapped in
favour of larger or more elaborate models, it found a most
important and inexhaustible field of profit.  The governments of
the world were taken unawares, and in a little while the industry,
by sound and accepted methods of salesmanship, was able to impose
its novelties upon these ancient institutions with their tradition
of implacable mutual antagonism.  It was realized very soon that
any decay of patriotism and loyalty would be inimical to this great
system of profits, and the selling branch of the industry either
bought directly or contrived to control most of the great
newspapers of the time, and exercised a watchful vigilance on the
teaching of belligerence in schools.  Following the established
rules and usages for a marketing industrialism, and with little
thought of any consequences but profits, the directors of these
huge concerns built up the new warfare that found its first
exposition in the Great War of 1914–18, and gave its last desperate
and frightful convulsions in the Polish wars of 1940 and the
subsequent decades.</p><p>Even at its outset in 1914–18 this new warfare was extraordinarily
uncongenial to humanity.  It did not even satisfy man's normal
combative instincts.  What an angry man wants to do is to beat and
bash another living being, not to be shot at from ten miles
distance or poisoned in a hole.  Instead of drinking delight of
battle with their peers, men tasted all the indiscriminating terror
of an earthquake.  The war literature stored at Atacama, to which
we have already referred, is full of futile protest against the
horror, the unsportsmanlike quality, the casual filthiness and
indecency, the mechanical disregard of human dignity of the new
tactics.  But such protest itself was necessarily futile, because
it did not go on to a clear indictment of the forces that were
making, sustaining and distorting war.  The child howled and wept
and they did not even attempt to see what it was had tormented it.</p><p>To us nowadays it seems insane that profit–making individuals and
companies should have been allowed to manufacture weapons and sell
the apparatus of murder to all comers.  But to the man of the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries it seemed the most natural
thing in the world.  It had grown up in an entirely logical and
necessary way, without any restraint upon the normal marketing
methods of peace–time commerce, from the continually more extensive
application of new industrial products to warfare.  Even after the
World War catastrophe, after that complete demonstration of the
futility of war, men still allowed themselves to be herded like
sheep into the barracks, to be trained to consume, and be consumed,
by new lines of slaughter goods produced and marketed by the still
active armament traders.  And the accumulation of a still greater
and still more dangerous mass of war material continued.</p><p>There is a queer little pseudo–scientific essay by a Bengali
satirist (Professor K. Chondra Sen, 1897–1942) among the India
series of reprints, professing to be a study of the relative
stupidity of the more intelligent animals up to and including man.
He is concerned by the fatuity with which the mass of humanity
watched the preparation of its own destruction during this period.
He considers the fate of various species of penguins which were
then being swept out of the world—the twentieth century was an age
of extermination for hundreds of species—and infers a similar
destiny for mankind.  He begins with the slaughter of the penguins;
he gives photographs of these extraordinary creatures in their
multitudes, gathered on the beaches of Oceanic islands and watching
the advance of their slayers.  One sees them scattered over a long
sloping shore, standing still, or waddling about or flapping their
stumpy wings while the massacre goes on.  They seem to be vaguely
interested in the killing of their fellows, but in no way stirred
either to flight or resistance.  (No thorough scientific
observations, we may note, were ever made of penguin mentality, the
revival of experimental psychology comes too late for that, and we
are left now to guess at what went on in these queer brains of
theirs during these raids.  There is evidence to show that these
creatures had curiosity, kindliness, sympathy and humour; and they
were eminently teachable.  They stood quite high in the scale of
bird intelligence.  And yet they permitted their own extinction.)
They were not so much a–mental, Professor Sen insists, half
seriously, half mockingly, as defective and wrong.  They were
capable of many idea systems but not of the idea of social
preservation.  He suggests, too, that the same was true of the sea
elephants which were also very rapidly destroyed.  (The last of
these were murdered later "to make a record" by a Japanese lunatic
with a craving for an "immortal Name" when the protective patrol
was withdrawn during the "revolt of the sea pirates" in C.E. 1985.)
But after Professor Sen has weighed every possible case, he still
awards the palm for complaisant social stupidity to man.</p><p>With a fine parody of the social research methods of that time, he
gives various photographs of what he calls the "human penguins" of
that early Twentieth Century, waddling in their sleek thousands to
see battleships launched, to rejoice over reviews and parades, to
watch their army aeroplanes stunting in the sky.  Side by side he
gives photographs of penguin assemblies that, either by happy
accident or skilful rearrangement, are absurdly parallel.  He gives
lists of shareholders in the armament firms, including the current
Bishop of Hereford, the current President of the Free Church
Council, a great multitude of clergymen, artists, judges and every
sort of gentlefolk.  He quotes extensively from the Hansard records
of various debates in the British House of Commons (in a debate on
the Naval Estimates early in 1914, Philip Snowden, the radical
socialist who afterwards became Viscount Snowden, was particularly
explicit), showing that the nature of the danger was clearly seen
and clearly and publicly stated.  Only it was not FELT.  It is upon
that little difference between factual apprehension and the kind of
apprehension that leads to effective action that our interest
concentrates here.</p><p>Why did humanity gape at the guns and do nothing?  And why, after
the Great War, after that generation had seen over twenty million
human beings perish painfully and untimely did it still go on,
doing nothing adequate to the occasion?  With the preparations
still mounting up and the horrible possibilities of war increasing
under its eyes?  The great Cradle of Bethlehem Steel Corporation of
America in 1929 was revealed as actively opposing naval disarmament
at the Geneva Conference of 1927.  At any rate it was associated
with three shipbuilding companies who were sued by a Mr. Shearer,
who claimed to have been given that task, for fees alleged to be
due to him.  There seems to have been little dispute that he had
been so employed; the case turned upon the extent of his services
and the amount of his fees.  Nothing was done by the penguins
either to the companies concerned or to Mr. Shearer.  A few
expressed indignation; that was all.  Just as now and then no doubt
a bird or so squawked at the oil hunters.  For a detailed account
and references see The Navy: Defence or Portent by C. A. Beard,
1930, reprinted Hist. Doc. Series 4,270,112.</p><p>The clue lies in the fact that there was practically no
philosophical education at all in the world, no intelligent
criticism of generalizations and general ideas.  There was no
science of social processes at all.  People were not trained to
remark the correlations of things; for the most part they were not
aware that there was any correlation between things; they imagined
this side of life might change and that remain unaltered.  The
industrialists and financiers built up these monstrous armaments
and imposed them on the governments of the time, with a disregard
of consequences that seems now absolutely imbecile.  Most of these
armament propagandists were admirable in their private lives:
gentle lovers, excellent husbands, fond of children and animals,
good fellows, courteous to inferiors, and so on.  Sir Basil
Zaharoff, the greatest of munition salesmen, as one sees him in the
painting (ascribed to Orpen) recently discovered in Paris, with his
three–cornered hat, his neat little moustaches and beardlet, and
the ribbon of some Order of Chivalry about his neck, looks quite a
nice, if faintly absurd, little gentleman.  Those shareholding
bishops and clergy may, for anything we know to the contrary, have
had charming personalities.  But they wanted their dividends.  And
in order to pay them those dividends, the dread of war and the need
of war had to be kept alive in the public mind.</p><p>That was done most conveniently through the Press.  You could buy a
big newspaper in those days, lock, stock and barrel, for five or
ten million dollars, and the profits made on one single battleship
came to more than that.  Naturally, and according to the best
business traditions, the newspapers hired or sold themselves to the
war salesmen.  What was wrong in that?  Telling the news in those
days was a trade, not a public duty.  A daily paper that had dealt
faithfully with this accumulating danger would quite as naturally
and necessarily have found its distribution impeded, have found
itself vigorously outdone by more richly endowed competitors, able
because of their wealth to buy up all the most attractive features,
able to outdo it in every way with the common reader.</p><p>It wasn't that the newspaper owners and the munition dealers
wanted anyone hurt.  They only wanted to sell equipment and see
it used up.  Nor was it that the newspapers desired the wholesale
mangling and butchering of human beings.  They wanted sales and
advertisements.  The butchery was quite by the way, an unfortunate
side issue to legitimate business.  Shortsightedness is not
diabolical, even if it produces diabolical results.</p><p>And even those soldiers?  Freudheim, in his analysis of the
soldierly mind, shows a picture of that Sir Henry Wilson we have
already mentioned, arrayed in shirt–sleeves and digging modestly in
the garden of his villa during a phase of retirement, and the same
individual smirking in all his glory, buttons, straps and
"decorations", as a director of military operations.  It is an
amazing leap from the suburban insignificance of a retired clerk to
godlike importance.  In peace time, on the evidence of his own
diaries, this Wilson was a tiresome nobody, an opinionated bore; in
war he passed beyond criticism and became a god.  One understands
at once what a vital matter employment and promotion must have been
to him.  But so far as we can tell he desired no killing AS
killing.  If he had been given blood to drink he would probably
have been sick.  Yet he lived upon tanks of blood.</p><p>These professional soldiers thought of slaughter as little as
possible.  It is preposterous to say they desired it, much less
that they gloated over it.  It might have fared better with their
men if they had thought of it more.  They had an age–old
sentimental devotion to their country, a solemn sense of great
personal worth in their services, an orgiastic delight of battle.
And they did not see, nor want to see, what was beyond their
occupation.  Their religious teachers were quite ready to assure
them they were correct in all they did and were.</p><p>The senescent Christian Churches of that age had indeed a very
direct interest in war.  A marked tendency to ignore or ridicule
the current religious observances had become manifest, but under
the stresses of loss and death people turned again to the altar.
It is easily traceable in the fiction of the time.  The despised
curate of the tea–cups and croquet lawn became the implicitly
heroic "padre" of the sentimental war stories.</p><p>The problem that confronted the growing minority that was waking up
to the perils and possibilities of our species in the third and
fourth decades of the twentieth century was this:  How in the first
place to concentrate the minds of people onto this state of
distraction and diffusion, how to bring them to bear upon the crude
realities before them, and then how to organize the gigantic effort
needed to shake off that intermittent and ever more dangerous fever
of war and that chronic onset of pauperization which threatened the
whole world with social dissolution.</p><p>There was no central antagonist, no ruling devil, for those
anxious spirits to fight.  That would have made it a straight,
understandable campaign.  But the Press with a certain flavouring
of pious intentions was practically against them.  Old social and
political traditions, whatever the poses they assumed, were tacitly
against them.  History was against them, for it could but witness
that war had always gone on since its records began.  Not only the
current Bishop of Hereford, and the current President of the Free
Church Council, caught with their dividends upon them, but their
Churches and the Catholic Church, and indeed all the Christian
Churches, in spite of their allegiance to the Prince of Peace, were
quietly competitive with, or antagonistic to, the secular world
controls that alone could make a healthy world peace possible.  The
admission of the insufficiency of their own creeds to comfort or
direct would have been the necessary prelude to a new moral effort.</p><p>And the idea of the naturalness and inevitability of war was not
only everywhere in the world around those few forward–looking men
who knew better, it was in their blood and habits.  They were
seeking how to attack not a fortress, but what seemed a perpetually
recuperative jungle of mixed motives, tangled interests and cross–
purposes, within themselves as without.</p></section><footer/></body></html>