<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>11: The Impulse to Abolish War: Why the League of Nations Failed to Pacify the World</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch01s10.xhtml" title="10: Versailles: Seed Bed of Disasters"/><link rel="next" href="ch01s12.xhtml" title="12: The Breakdown of &quot;Finance&quot; and Social Morale After Versailles"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="11: The Impulse to Abolish War: Why the League of Nations Failed to Pacify the World" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646568980"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">11: The Impulse to Abolish War: Why the League of Nations Failed to Pacify the World</h2></div></div></div><p>Before we leave that bleak and futile idealist, Woodrow Wilson,
altogether, we will draw the attention of the student to the
essential factors of his failure.  The defects of his personality
must not blind us to the impossibility of his ambition.  His narrow
egotism, the punitive treatment of the Central Powers and so forth,
merely emphasized a disadvantage that would have been fatal to the
launching of any League of Nations at that time.  There had been an
insufficient mental preparation for a world system to operate.  No
ideology existed to sustain it.  The World–State, the Modern State,
was still only a vaguely apprehended suggestion; it had not been
worked out with any thoroughness and the League was the most hasty
of improvisations.</p><p>It needed the life scheming of de Windt and his associates, which
we shall presently describe; it needed a huge development and
application of the science of social psychology, before the
supersession of the chaos of sovereign states by a central control
was even a remote possibility.  Wilson thought he could get
together with a few congenial spirits and write a recipe for human
unity.  He had not the slightest inkling of the gigantic
proportions, the intricacy, intimacy and profundity, of the task
that was opening before him.  He attempted to patch up the outworn
system of his time and pass it off as a new one.  He did not dream
of the monetary reconstruction, the need for a thorough–going
socialism throughout the world, and for a complete revolution in
education, before the peace and security of mankind could be
established.  Yet, narrow and blind as he was, he seems to have
been in advance of the general thought of his age.</p><p>This premature and ineffectual League was a hindrance rather than a
help to the achievement of world peace.  It got in the way.  It
prevented people from thinking freely about the essentials of the
problem.  Organizations of well–meaning folk, the British League of
Nations Union, for example, came into existence to support it, and
resisted rather than helped any effectual criticism of its
constitution and working.  They would say that it was "better than
nothing", whereas a false start is very much worse than nothing.
In the post–war decade, the amount of vigorous constructive thought
in the general mind about world politics was extraordinarily small.
It was only when the insufficiency of the League had passed beyond
any possibility of dispute that men began to take up the abandoned
search for world unification again.</p><p>A dozen years later the Modern State movement was still only
foreshadowed in sketchy attempts to find a comprehensive set of
general formulæ for liberal progressive effort.  The pacificists,
communists, socialists and every other sort of "ists" who gave a
partial and confused expression to human discontent had still to be
drawn together into understanding and cooperation.  Most of their
energy was wasted in obscure bickerings, mutual suspicion and petty
and partial tentatives.  The middle of the century had been passed
before there was any considerable body of Modern State propaganda
and education on earth.</p></section><footer/></body></html>