<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>5: The Way in Which Competition and Monetary Inefficiency Strained the Old Order</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch01s04.xhtml" title="4: Early Attempts to Understand and Deal With These Disproportions; the Criticisms of Karl Marx and Henry George"/><link rel="next" href="ch01s06.xhtml" title="6: The Paradox of Over-production and Its Relation to War"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="5: The Way in Which Competition and Monetary Inefficiency Strained the Old Order" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646487940"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">5: The Way in Which Competition and Monetary Inefficiency Strained the Old Order</h2></div></div></div><p>In the twentieth century of the Christian era there was still no
common currency by which to measure and carry on the world's
economic exchanges.  Those transactions were not merely apprehended
inexactly because of this; they were falsified, and it did not seem
possible that there would ever be an effective simplification.  It
is true that during what is known as the First Period of General
Prosperity, from 1850 C.E. until 1914, there was a kind of working
world system of currency and credit, centring upon the City of
London and based on the gold pound; but this was a purely
accidental growth, made workable by successive gold discoveries
which prevented too disastrous a fall in prices as productive
efficiency increased, and by the circumstances that gave the
insular English a lead in the development of steam transport on
land and sea and real incentives towards a practical propaganda of
world free trade.</p><p>That first gleam of cosmopolitan sunlight waned as it had waxed,
without any contemporary apprehension of the real forces at work,
much less any attempt to seize upon them and organize them in
permanence.  The financial ascendency and initiative of the City of
London crumbled away after the war and nothing appeared to take its
place.  In any case, this quasi–cosmopolitan system based on the
gold sovereign, and owing its modicum of success to continual
increments in the available gold, would have wilted as the world's
gold supplies gave out, but the strangulation of the world's
industry after the war was greatly accelerated by the gold hoarding
of the Americans and French.</p><p>And during all that phase of opportunity there was no substantial
effort to take hold of the land, sea and natural resources of the
planet and bring them from a state of fragmentary, chaotic and
wasteful exploitation into a general scheme.  There remained sixty–
odd "sovereign" governments, each claiming a supreme control of all
the natural wealth of the areas within its frontiers, and under
these governments, under conditions that varied with each, there
were private corporations and individuals with a right to deal more
or less freely with the fragment upon which they had established a
grip.  Everywhere the guiding principle in the exploitation of the
minerals, sunshine and power resources of the globe was the profit
of single or associated private individuals, and the patchwork
governments of the time interfered in the profit scramble only in
favour of their nationals against their foreign rivals.  Yet for
nearly a hundred years, because of the fortunate influx of gold and
inventions, this profit–seeking system, linked to the metallic
monetary system, sufficed to sustain a very great expansion and
enlargement of human life, and it was hard to convince the mass of
men, and still harder to convince the prosperous manufacturers,
traders, miners, cultivators and financiers who dominated public
affairs, that this was not a permanent system and that the world
already needed very essential modifications of its economic
methods.  A considerable measure of breakdown, a phase of display,
fear and distress, was necessary before they could be disillusioned.</p><p>The nineteenth century had for its watchwords "individual
enterprise and free competition".  But the natural end of all
competition is the triumph of one competitor.  It was in America
that the phenomena of Big Business first appeared and demonstrated
the force of this truism; at a score of points triumphant
organizations capable of crushing out new competitors and crippling
and restraining new initiatives that threatened their predominance
appeared.  In Europe there was little governmental resistance
to industrial alliances and concentrations in restraint of
competition, and they speedily developed upon a scale that
transcended political frontiers, but in the United States of
America there was a genuine effort to prevent enterprises
developing on a monopolistic scale.  The conspicuous leader of this
preventive effort was the first President Roosevelt (1858–1919) and
its chief fruit the Sherman Anti–Trust Act (1890), which proved a
rich mine for lawyers in the subsequent decades.</p><p>These great consolidations, which closed the phase of free
competition, were so far effective in controlling trade and
arresting new developments that Hilary Hooker, in his Studies in
Business Coagulation During the First Period of General Prosperity,
is able to cite rather more than two thousand instances, ranging
from radium and new fruits and foodstuffs to gramophones,
automobiles, reconstructed households, artificial moonlight for the
roadways by the countryside, and comfortable and economical railway
plant, in which ample supplies or beneficial improvements were
successfully kept off the market in the interests of established
profit–making systems.  After 1900 C.E. again there was a world–
wide cessation of daily newspaper initiative and a consequent
systole of free speech.  Distribution, paper supply and news
services had fallen into the hands of powerful groups able and
willing to crush out any new types of periodical, or any inimical
schools of public suggestion.  They set about stereotyping the
public mind.</p><p>These same profit–making systems in possession also played a large
part in arresting competition from countries in which they were
less completely in control, by subsidized political action for the
maintenance of protective tariffs.  Long before the world break–
down became manifest, the experience of the ordinary consumer so
far belied the sanguine theory that free competition was a mode of
endless progress, that he was still living in a house, wearing
clothes, using appliances, travelling about in conveyances, and
being fed with phrases and ideas that by the standard of the known
and worked–out inventions of the time should have been discarded on
an average, Hooker computes, from a quarter to half a century
before.  There was labour unemployed and abundant material
available to remedy all this, but its utilization was held up by
the rent–exacting and profit–earning systems already in possession.</p><p>This lag in modernization added greatly to the effects of increased
productive efficiency in the disengagement of those vast masses of
destitute unemployed and unemploying people which began to appear
almost everywhere, like the morbid secretion of a diseased body, as
the twentieth century passed on into its third decade.</p></section><footer/></body></html>