<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>2: How the Idea and Hope of the Modern World State First Appeared</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch01s01.xhtml" title="1: A Chronological Note"/><link rel="next" href="ch01s03.xhtml" title="3: The Accumulating Disproportions of the Old Order"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="2: How the Idea and Hope of the Modern World State First Appeared" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646437640"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">2: How the Idea and Hope of the Modern World State First Appeared</h2></div></div></div><p>The essential difference between the world before the Great War and
the world after it lay in this, that before that storm of distress
and disillusionment the clear recognition that a worldwide order
and happiness, in spite of contemporary distresses, was within the
reach of mankind was confined to a few exceptional persons, while
after the catastrophe it had spread to an increasing multitude, it
had become a desperate hope and desire, and at last a working
conviction that made organized mass action possible.</p><p>Even those who apprehended this idea before the epoch of the Great
War seem to have propounded it with what impresses us today as an
almost inexplicable timidity and feebleness.  Apart from the great
star of Shelley, which shines the brighter as his successors
dwindle in perspective, there is a flavour of unreality about all
these pre–war assertions of a possible world order.  In most of
them the Victorian terror of "extravagance" is dominant, and the
writer simpers and laughs at his own suggestions in what was
evidently supposed to be a very disarming manner.  Hardly any of
these prophets dared believe in their own reasoning.  Maxwell Brown
has recently disinterred a pamphlet, The Great Analysis,<a href="#ftn.idp140532836397600" class="footnote"><sup class="footnote" id="idp140532836397600">[1]</sup></a> dated
1912, in which a shrewd and reasoned forecast of the primary
structure of the Modern State, quite amazingly prescient for the
time, was broached with the utmost timidity, without even an
author's name.  It was a scheme to revolutionize the world, and the
writer would not put his name to it, he confesses, because it might
make him ridiculous.</p><p>Maxwell Brown's entertaining Modern State Prophets Before the Great
War is an exhaustive study of the psychological processes by which
this idea, which is now the foundation of our contemporary life,
gradually ousted its opposite of combative patriotism and
established itself as a practicable and necessary form of action
for men of good–will a century and a half ago.  He traces the idea
almost to its germ; he shows that its early manifestations, so far
from being pacific, were dreams of universal conquest.  He tells
of its age–long struggle with everyday usage and practical
commonsense.  In the first of his huge supplementary volumes he
gives thousands of quotations going back far beyond the beginnings
of the Christian Era.  All the monotheistic religions were, in
spirit, world–state religions.  He examines the Tower of Babel myth
as the attempt of some primordial cosmopolitan, some seer before
the dawn, to account for the divisions of mankind.  (There is
strong reason now for ascribing this story to Emesal Gudeka of
Nippur, the early Sumerian fabulist.)</p><p>Maxwell Brown shows how the syncretic religious developments, due
to the growth of the early empires and the official pooling of
gods, led necessarily to monotheism.  From at least the time of
Buddha onward, the sentiment, if not the living faith, in human
brotherhood, always existed somewhere in the world.  But its
extension from a mere sentiment and a fluctuating sympathy for the
stranger to the quality of a practicable enterprise was a very
recent process indeed.  The necessary conditions were not
satisfied.</p><p>In the briefer studies of human innovations that preceded his more
important contributions to human history, Maxwell Brown has shown
how for the past ten thousand years at least, since the Cro–
Magnards stamped their leather robes and tents, the art of printing
reappeared and disappeared again and again, never culminating in
the printed book and all its consequences, never obtaining a
primary importance in human doings, until the fifteenth century
(C.E.); he has assembled the evidence for man's repeated abortive
essays in flying, from the fourth dynasty gliders recently found at
Bedrashen, the shattered Yu–chow machine and the interesting
wreckage, ornaments and human remains found last year in Mirabella
Bay.  (These last were first remarked in 2104 C.E. after an
earthquake in the deep sea photographs of the survey aeroplane
Crawford, and they were subsequently sought and recovered by the
divers of the submarine Salvemini belonging to the Naples
Biological Station.  They have now been identified by Professor
Giulio Marinetti as the remains of the legendary glider of Dædalus
and Icarus.)  Maxwell Brown has also traced the perpetual discovery
and rediscovery of America from the days of the Aalesund tablets
and the early Chinese inscriptions in the caves near Bahia Coqui to
the final establishment of uninterrupted communications across the
Atlantic by the Western Europeans in the fifteenth century C.E.  In
all there are sixteen separate ineffectual discoveries of America
either from the east or from the west now on record, and there may
have been many others that left no trace behind them.</p><p>These earlier cases of human enterprise and inadequacy help us to
understand the long struggle of the Age of Frustration and the
difficulty our ancestors found in achieving what is now so
obviously the only sane arrangement of human affairs upon this
planet.</p><p>The fruitlessness of all these premature inventions is very easily
explained.  First in the case of the Transatlantic passage; either
the earlier navigators who got to America never got back, or, if
they did get back, they were unable to find the necessary support
and means to go again before they died, or they had had enough of
hardship, or they perished in a second attempt.  Their stories were
distorted into fantastic legends and substantially disbelieved.  It
was, indeed, a quite futile adventure to get to America until the
keeled sailing ship, the science of navigation, and the mariner's
compass had been added to human resources.</p><p>Then again, in the matter of printing, it was only when the Chinese
had developed the systematic manufacture of abundant cheap paper
sheets in standard sizes that the printed book—and its consequent
release of knowledge—became practically possible.  Finally the
delay in the attainment of flying was inevitable because before men
could progress beyond precarious gliding it was necessary for
metallurgy to reach a point at which the internal combustion engine
could be made.  Until then they could build nothing strong enough
and light enough to battle with the eddies of the air.</p><p>In an exactly parallel manner, the conception of one single human
community organized for collective service to the common weal had
to wait until the rapid evolution of the means of communication
could arrest and promise to defeat the disintegrative influence of
geographical separation.  That rapid evolution came at last in the
nineteenth century, and it has been described already in a
preceding chapter of this world history.  [Not Recorded by Raven.—
ED.]  Steam power, oil power, electric power, the railway, the
steamship, the aeroplane, transmission by wire and aerial
transmission followed each other very rapidly.  They knit together
the human species as it had never been knit before.  Insensibly, in
less than a century, the utterly impracticable became not merely a
possible adjustment but an urgently necessary adjustment if
civilization was to continue.</p><p>Now the cardinal prominence of the Great War in history lies in
this, that it demonstrated the necessity of that adjustment.  It
was never considered to be necessary before.  Recognition lagged
behind accomplishment.  None of the pre–war World–State Prophets
betrays any sense of necessity.  They make their polite and timid
gestures towards human unity as something nice and desirable indeed
but anything but imperative.  The clearest demand for world–wide
cooperation before the war, came from the Second International.
And even after the war, and after the vague and vacillating
adumbration of a federal super–state by the League of Nations at
Geneva, most of even the most advanced writers seem to have been
still under the impression that the utmost adjustment needed was
some patching up of the current system so as to prevent or mitigate
war and restrain the insurrectionary urge of the unprosperous.</p><p>Even the Communist movement which, as we had told already, had been
able by a conspiracy of accidents to seize upon Russia and
demonstrate the value of its theories there, lapsed from, rather
than advanced towards, cosmopolitan socialism.  Its theories, as we
have shown, were hopelessly inadequate for its practical needs.
The development of its ideology was greatly hampered by the
conservative dogmatism imposed upon it by the incurable egotism of
Marx.  His intolerance, his innate bad manners, his vain insistence
that he had produced a final doctrine to put beside Darwinism, cast
a long shadow of impatience and obduracy upon the subsequent
development of Communism.  He was bitterly jealous of the Utopian
school of socialism, and so, until Lenin faced the urgencies of
power, the "orthodox" Marxist took a quite idiotic pride in a
planless outlook.  "Overthrow capitalism", he said, and what could
happen but millennial bliss?  Communism insisted indeed upon the
necessity of economic socialization but—until it attained power in
Russia—without a glance at its technical difficulties.  It
produced its belated and ill–proportioned Five Year Plan only in
1928 C.E., eleven years after its accession to power.  Until then
it had no comprehensive working scheme whatever for the realization
of socialism.  Thrown back on experiment, it was forced to such
desperately urgent manoeuvres, improvisations and changes of front,
and defended by such tawdry and transparent apologetics, that the
general world movement passed out of its ken.</p><p>The reader of this world history knows already how the moral and
intellectual force of the Communist Party proved unequal, after the
death of Lenin, to control or resist the dictatorship of that
forcible, worthy, devoted and limited man, the Georgian, Stalin.
The premature death of the creative and adaptable Lenin and the
impatient suppression by Stalin of such intelligent, troublesome,
but necessary types as Trotsky—a man who, but for lack of tact and
essential dignity, might well have been Lenin's successor—crippled
whatever hope there may have been that the Modern State would first
emerge in Russia.  Terrible are the faithful disciples of creative
men.  Lenin relaxed and reversed the dogmatism of Marx, Stalin made
what he imagined to be Leninism into a new and stiffer dogmatism.
Thereafter the political doctrinaire dominated and crippled the
technician in a struggle that cried aloud for technical competence.
Just as theological disputes impoverished and devastated Europe
through the long centuries of Christendom, and reduced the benefits
of its unifying influence to zero, so in Russia efficiency of
organization was prevented by the pedantries of political
theorists.  The young were trained to a conceit and a xenophobia,
indistinguishable in its practical effects from the gross
patriotism of such countries as France, Germany, Italy or Scotland.</p><p>Because of this subordination of its mental development to
Politics, Russia passed into a political and social phase
comparable, as Rostovtzeff pointed out at the time in his Social
and Economic History of the Roman Empire, in its universal
impoverishment and its lack of any critical vigour, to the well–
meaning but devitalizing autocracy of the Emperor Diocletian.  From
its very start the Russian revolution failed in its ambition to
lead mankind.  Its cosmopolitanism lasted hardly longer than the
cosmopolitanism of the great French revolution a dozen decades
earlier.</p><p>This almost inevitable lag of the constructive movement in Russia
behind Western developments was foreseen by the shrewd and
penetrating brain of Lenin even in the phase of its apparent
leadership (see No. 3090 in the thirteenth series of the Historical
Documents Collection, Left Wing Communism).  But his observation
found little or no echo in the incurably illiberal thought of the
Marxian tradition.</p><p>It was in Western Europe especially that the conception of the
organized and disciplined World–State as a revolutionary objective,
ultimately grew to its full proportions.  At first it grew
obscurely.  In 1933, any observer might have been misled by the
fact of the Fascist régime in Italy, by the tumult of the Nazi
party in Germany, by similar national–socialist movements in other
countries, and by the increase in tariff barriers and other
restraints upon trade everywhere, to conclude that the cosmopolitan
idea was everywhere in retreat before the obsessions of race, creed
and nationalism.  Yet all the while the germs of the Modern State
were growing, everywhere its votaries were learning and assembling
force.</p><p>It needed the financial storm of the years 1928 and 1929 C.E. and
the steadily progressive collapse of the whole world's economic
life, of which this storm was the prelude, to give the World–State
prophets the courage of their convictions.  Then indeed they began
to speak out.  Instead of the restrained, partial and inconclusive
criticism of public affairs which had hitherto contented them, they
now insisted plainly upon the need of a world–wide reconstruction,
that is to say of a world revolution—though "revolution" was still
a word they shirked.  The way in which this increased definition of
aim and will came about is characteristic of the changing quality
of social life.  It was not that one or two outstanding men
suddenly became audible and conspicuous as leaders in this
awakening.  There were no leaders.  It was a widespread movement in
human thought.</p><p>The conclusions upon which intelligent people were converging may
be briefly stated.  They had arrived at the realization that human
society had become one indivisible economic system with novel and
enormous potentialities of well–being.  By 1931 C.E. this
conception becomes visible even in the obstinately intellectualist
mind of France—for example, in the parting speech to America of an
obscure and transitory French Prime Minister, Laval, who crossed
the Atlantic on some new undiscoverable mission in that year; and
we find it promptly echoed by such prominent loud speakers as
President Hoover of America and Mr. Ramsay MacDonald the British
Prime Minister.</p><p>That idea at any rate had already become sufficiently popular for
the politicians to render it lip service.  But it was still only
the intelligent minority who went on to the logical consequences
of its realization; that is to say, the necessity of disavowing
the sovereignty of contemporary governments, of setting up
authoritative central controls to supplement or supersede them, and
of putting the production of armaments, the production of the main
economic staples and the protection of workers from destructive
under–payment, beyond the reach of profit–seeking manipulation.</p><p>Yet by 1932–33 this understanding minority was speaking very
plainly.  These immense changes were no longer being presented as
merely desirable things; they were presented as urgently necessary
things if civilization was to be saved from an immense catastrophe.
And not merely saved.  The alternative to disaster, they saw even
then, was not just a bleak and terrified security.  That was the
last thing possible.  There was no alternative to disorder and
wretchedness, but "such an abundance, such a prosperity and
richness of opportunity", as man had never known before.  (These
words are quoted from a Scottish newspaper of the year 1929.)
Enlightened people in 1932 C.E. were as assured of the possibility
of world order, universal sufficiency and ever increasing human
vitality as are we who live to–day in ample possession of our lives
amidst the practical realization of that possibility.</p><p>Clearness of vision did not make for the happiness of the
enlightened.  Their minds were tormented not simply by contemporary
fears and miseries, but by the sure knowledge of a possible world
of free activity within the reach of man and, as it were, magically
withheld.  They saw hundreds of millions of lives cramped and
crippled, meagrely lived, sacrificed untimely, and they could not
see any primary necessity for this blighting and starvation of
human life.  They saw youthful millions drifting to lives of
violence, mutilation and premature and hideous deaths.  And beyond
was our security, our eventfulness and our freedom.</p><p>Maxwell Brown, in a chapter called "Tantalus 1932", cites forty
instances of these realizations.  But the legendary Tantalus was
put within apparent reach of the unattainable by the inexorable
decrees of the gods.  Mankind was under no such pitiless destiny.
The world–wide Modern State shone bright upon the living
imaginations of our race within a decade of the Great War, absurdly
near, fantastically out of reach.  For a century of passionate
confusion and disorder, that modern state was not to be released
from potentiality into actuality.</p><p>It is to the story of these battling, lost and suffering
generations, the "generations of the half light", that we must now
proceed.</p><p>When now we look back to the scattered and diverse individuals who
first give expression to this idea of the modern World–State which
was dawning upon the human intelligence, when we appraise their
first general efforts towards its realization, we need, before we
can do them anything like justice, to attempt some measure of the
ignorances, prejudices and other inertias, the habits of concession
and association, the herd love and the herd fear, with which they
had to struggle not only in the society in which they found
themselves, but within themselves.  It is not a conflict of light
and darkness we have to describe; it is the struggle of the
purblind among the blind.  We have to realize that for all that
they were haunted by a vision of the civilized world of to–day,
they still belonged not to our age but to their own.  The thing
imagined in their minds was something quite distinct from their
present reality.  Maxwell Brown has devoted several chapters, and a
third great supplementary volume, to a special selection of early
Modern State Prophets who followed public careers.  He showed
conclusively that in the third and fourth decades of the twentieth
century (C.E.) there was a rapidly increasing number of men and
women with a clear general conception of the possibilities of the
modern world.  He gives their written and spoken words, often
astoundingly prescient and explicit.  And then he traces out the
tenor of their lives subsequent to these utterances.  The
discrepancy of belief and effort is a useful and indeed a startling
reminder of the conditional nature of the individual life.</p><p>As he writes:  "In the security and serenity of the study, these
men and women could see plainly.  In those hours of withdrawal, the
fragile delicate brain matter could escape from immediacy,
apprehended causation in four dimensions, reach forward to the
permanent values of social events in the space–time framework.  But
even to the study there penetrated the rumble of the outer
disorder.  And directly the door was opened, forthwith the uproar
of contemporary existence, the carnival, the riot, the war and the
market, beat in triumphantly.  The raging question of what had to
be done that day, scattered the fine thought of our common destiny
to the four winds of heaven."</p><p>Maxwell Brown adds a vivid illustration to this passage.  It is the
facsimile of the first draft by Peter Raut, the American
progressive leader, of the Revolutionary Manifesto of 1937.  It was
indisputably a very inspiring document in its time and Raut gave
the last proof of loyalty to the best in his mind, by a courageous
martyrdom.  But in the margin of this draft one's attention is
caught by a maze of little figures; little sums in multiplication
and addition.  By his almost inspired gift for evidence and through
the industry of his group of research assistants, Maxwell Brown has
been able to demonstrate exactly what these sums were.  They show
that even while Raut, so far as his foresight permitted, was
planning our new world, his thoughts were not wholly fixed on that
end.  They wandered.  For a time the manifesto was neglected while
he did these sums.  He was gambling in industrial equities, and a
large and active portion of his brain was considering whether the
time had arrived to sell.</p><div class="footnotes" epub:type="footnotes"><br/><hr class="footnote-hr"/><div id="ftn.idp140532836397600" class="footnote" epub:type="footnote"><p><a href="#idp140532836397600" class="para"><sup class="para">[1] </sup></a>Here for once the editor knows better than the writer of the
history.  This pamphlet was written by William Archer, the dramatic
critic, and reprinted under its author's name with a preface by
Gilbert Murray in 1931.  Apparently the book collectors of the
years ahead are going to miss this book.—ED.</p></div></div></section><footer/></body></html>