<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>12: The Breakdown of "Finance" and Social Morale After Versailles</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch01s11.xhtml" title="11: The Impulse to Abolish War: Why the League of Nations Failed to Pacify the World"/><link rel="next" href="ch01s13.xhtml" title="13: 1933: &quot;Progress&quot; Comes to a Halt"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="12: The Breakdown of &quot;Finance&quot; and Social Morale After Versailles" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646585060"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">12: The Breakdown of "Finance" and Social Morale After Versailles</h2></div></div></div><p>The unprecedented range and destruction of the World War were, we
have pointed out, largely ascribable to the hypertrophy of the
world's iron and steel industry relatively to the political and
social concepts of the race.  But in the first "post–war" decade
the stresses of other disproportionate developments began to make
themselves manifest at various other weak points in the loosely
linked association of our species.  The war from the economic point
of view had been the convulsive using up of an excess of production
that the race had no other method of distributing and consuming.
But the necessities of the struggle, and particularly its
interference with international trading, which had evoked factories
and finishing processes in many undeveloped regions hitherto
yielding only raw or unfinished materials, had added greatly to the
gross bulk of productive plant throughout the world, and so soon as
the open war–furnaces ceased to burn up the surplus and hold
millions of men out of the labour market, this fact became more and
more oppressively apparent.  The postwar increase in war
preparation, which went on in spite of endless palavering about
disarmament, did not destroy men, nor scrap and destroy material,
in sufficient quantity to relieve the situation.</p><p>Moreover, the expansion of productive energy was being accompanied
by a positive contraction of the distributive arrangements which
determined consumption.  The more efficient the output, the fewer
were the wages–earners.  The more stuff there was, the fewer
consumers there were.  The fewer the consumers, the smaller the
trading profits, and the less the gross spending power of the
shareholders and individual entrepreneurs.  So buying dwindled at
both ends of the process and the common investor suffered with the
wages–earner.  This was the "Paradox of Overproduction" which so
troubled the writers and journalists of the third decade of the
twentieth century.</p><p>It is easy for the young student to–day to ask "Why did they not
adjust?"  But let him ask himself who there was to adjust.  Our
modern superstructure of applied economic science, the David Lubin
Bureau and the General Directors' Board, with its vast recording
organization, its hundreds of thousands of stations and observers,
directing, adjusting, apportioning and distributing, had not even
begun to exist.  Adjustment was left to blind and ill–estimated
forces.  It was the general interest of mankind to be prosperous,
but it was nobody's particular interest to keep affairs in a frame
of prosperity.  Manifestly a dramatic revision of the liberties of
enterprise was necessary, but the enterprising people who
controlled politics, so far as political life was controlled, were
the very last people to undertake such a revision.</p><p>With the hypertrophy of productive activities there had been a
concurrent hypertrophy of banking and financial organization
generally, but it had been a flabby hypertrophy, a result of the
expansion of material production rather than a compensatory and
controlling development.</p><p>It is so plain to us to–day that the apportionment of the general
product of the world for enterprise or consumption is a department
of social justice and policy, and can be dealt with only in the
full light of public criticism and upon grounds of claim and need,
that it is difficult for us to understand the twentieth century
attitude to these things.  We should no more dream of leaving the
effectual control in these matters in private profit–seeking hands
than we should leave our law courts or our schools to the private
bidder.  But nothing of the sort was plain in 1935 C.E.  That
lesson had still to be learnt.</p><p>The story of banking and money in the early twentieth century has
so much in it verging upon the incredible, that it has become one
of the most attractive and fruitful fields for the student of
historical psychology.  The system had grown up as a tangle of
practice.  It was evolved, not designed.  There was never any
attempt to gauge the justice or the ultimate consequences of any
practice, so long as it worked at the time.  Men tried this and
that, did this and that, and concealed their opinions of what the
results might be.  Reserve was essential in the system.  So little
was the need for publicity in this universal interest understood,
that the most fundamental decisions affecting the common man's
purchasing power and the credit of industrial undertakings were
made in secret, and the restriction and stimulation of trade and
work went on in the profoundest obscurity.  Neither in the ordinary
courses of the schools and universities was there any instruction
in these essential facts.  The right of private enterprise to
privacy was respected in the Churches, the law courts and private
practice alike.  Men found themselves employed or unemployed,
cheated of their savings or better off, they knew not why.  Instead
of the clear knowledge of economic pressures and movements that we
have to–day, strange Mystery Men were dimly visible through a fog
of baffling evasions and mis–statements, manipulating prices and
exchanges.</p><p>Prominent among these Mystery Men was a certain Mr. Montagu Norman,
Governor of the Bank of England from 1920 to 1935.  He is among the
least credible figures in all history, and a great incrustation of
legends has accumulated about him.  In truth the only mystery about
him was that he was mysterious.  His portrait shows a slender,
bearded man, dressed more like a successful artist or musician than
the conventional banker of the time.  He was reputed to be shy and,
in the phraseology of the time, "charming", and he excited the
popular imagination by a habit of travelling about under assumed
names and turning up in unexpected places.  Why he did so, nobody
now knows.  Perhaps he did it for the fun of doing it.  He gave
evidence before an enquiry into finance in 1930 (the Macmillan
Committee), and from that and from one or two of his public
speeches that have been preserved, it is plain that he had what we
should now consider an entirely inadequate education for the veiled
activities in which he was engaged.  Of human ecology he betrays no
knowledge, and his ideas of social and economic processes are not
what we should now recognize as adequate general ideas even for an
ordinary citizen.  Indeed his chief qualification for his darkly
responsible post was some practical experience acquired in
association with various private banking firms before he entered
the service of the Bank of England.  This experience was acquired
during what we know now to have been a period of quite accidental
and transitory expansion of human wealth.  Plainly he did not even
bring a blank mind to his task.  He had a mind warped and
prejudiced by gainful banking under abnormal conditions.  Yet for a
time he was regarded as an "expert" of almost magical quality, and
during the convulsions of the post–war period he was able to
dictate or defeat arrangements that enriched or impoverished
millions of people in every country in Europe.</p><p>Another big obscure financial force in the war and post–war periods
was the complex of great private banking ganglia, of which Morgan
and Co., with its associated firms, was the most central and most
typical.  This particular firm carried on its business upon a scale
that completely overshadowed many minor governments.  The loans it
made or refused, confirmed or shattered régimes.  Its founder, J.
P. Morgan, a queer combination of Yankee "gentleman" and German
junker, whose innate acquisitiveness overflowed in great
collections of pictures and "art" objects generally, had died
before the outbreak of the war, but a phrase he used in a dispute
with President Roosevelt the First was taken up later and made into
a deadly critical weapon against the whole private banking world.
"Roosevelt", he protested, "wants all of us to have glass pockets!"</p><p>A second President Roosevelt was presently to revive that demand.</p><p>Nothing could better betray the habit of deep gainful manoeuvrings
than that phrase.  Morgan was never dishonest and always
disingenuous.  That was the rule of his game.  Opaque pockets he
insisted upon, and hidden motives, but also the punctual
performance of a bargain.  His tradition lived after him.  His firm
became an octopus of credit.  The interweaving bargains it made
hung like a shadowy group of spiders' webs about European life.  It
did its work of strangulation by its nature and without malice, as
a spider spins.  No contemporary could apprehend it.  The
particulars of any particular situation could only be unravelled
vaguely by a normal enquirer after many months of study.</p><p>Interacting with such mystery systems as these of the banking world
were other dark figures and groups, controlling vast industrial
activities, obsessing and perverting spending power.  There was,
for example, that Mystery Man of Mystery Men, Sir Basil Zaharoff,
the armaments salesman, still the delight of our schoolboy
novelists, and Ivar Kreuger, who created an almost world–wide
system of lucifer match monopolies, lent great sums to governments
and was finally caught forging big parcels of bonds.  He then
staged a suicide in Paris to escape the penalty of fraud.  (We have
to remember that in those days the lucifer matches we now see in
museums were consumed by the billion.  There was no other handy
source of fire, and their manufacture and distribution was on the
scale of a primary industry.)  Kreuger, unlike Morgan, was not a
man of the acquisitive type; he neither hoarded nor collected; he
kept nothing, not even the law, but he built lavishly and gave away
money for scientific research.  (The discovery of Pekin Man, a
memorable incident in early archæology, was, for instance, made
possible by his gifts.)  Morgan forestalled and accumulated;
Kreuger robbed and gave.  When Morgan spent his gains he bought
"Old Masters", manuscripts and suchlike indisputably genuine and
valuable junk; when Kreuger dispersed the moneys that had been
entrusted to him he made the most extraordinary experiments in
decorative art, in electric lighting and fantastic building.  But
each operated unchecked.  So obscure was the financial machinery of
the time that for some months Kreuger was able to pass off as
genuine a package of forged Italian bonds amounting to about half a
million dollars, and to obtain advances upon them from reputable
lenders.  To–day a trick of such a character would be detected,
were it possible, in the course of a single day by the ordinary
checking of the Transactions Bureau.  But nowadays no one would
have any reason for attempting anything of the sort.  The lives of
these Mystery Men and of the various groups of speculators (the
Balkan Gang, e.g.) who manipulated the exchanges of the various
national currencies of Eastern Europe, and of a great number of
other profit–seeking groups and individuals who were thrusting
about amidst the machinery of exchange, are to be found in the
Lives of Mischief (Financial Volumes) taken out of the Dictionary
of Biography.  The very best of them were men who waylaid gain or
sought adventures in a fog.  Most of them were as active and as
blind to the consequences of their activities as moles who
perforate a dyke.</p><p>In the files of the financial papers of this period, when the
movements of gold were of vital significance to the prices of
commodities and the credit of everyone in the world, one sees such
headings as "Unknown Buyer Takes Two Millions in Gold" or, less
exactly, "Gold Bought by Unknown Buyer".  Then all the little
manipulators of money would be set peering and spying and guessing
and rigging their business to the possible shift of equilibrium
this dark intimation might portend.</p><p>Other Mystery Men, Mystery Men ex officio, were the various
Ministers of Finance, of whom perhaps the British Chancellor of the
Exchequer was most typical.  Every year there was a vast amount of
whispering and hinting, peeping and calculating and going to and
fro, about the National Budget and the readjustment of taxation for
another twelvemonth.  An arithmetical mystery called "balancing the
Budget" had to be performed.  Business would be held up as the
great revelation drew near; gambling operations, insurance
operations, would multiply.  The wife, the family, the intimates
and secretaries of the Man of Destiny, went about the world sealed,
enigmatical, oracular, profoundly important with his reflected
importance.  At last the great day dawned.  The legislature would
assemble in unusual force, excited and curious.  The Witch Doctor,
with his portfolios of Obi, would take his place in the House of
Commons, rise portentously, begin the "Budget Speech".</p><p>No Budget Speech was complete without its "surprises".  Could
anything witness more vividly to the chaotic casualness of the
twentieth century?  Anything might be taxed; anything might be
relieved; anyone might shift the weights about.  In the economic
darkness of the time it did not seem to matter.  The marvel is that
the system staggered on for so long.</p><p>How amazing, how fantastic, was that condition of affairs!  It is
as if one of the great transatlantic liners of the period had
careered across the ocean with its passenger decks and cabins
brightly lit, its saloons and bars in full swing, while down below,
its essential machinery, manifestly with something going wrong with
it, had no arrangements for illumination at all and was served by
men (some of them masked), working without a foreman or any general
directions, by the light of an occasional match or a treasured but
rather worn–out electric torch, or altogether in the dark, upon the
great cranks and swiftly sliding shafts that beat and circled about
them.</p><p>From the very cessation of the fighting in 1918 and onward it was
manifest that this machinery was seriously out of gear.  The
economic history of the time is a story of swerves and fluctuations
of the most alarming kind, each one more disconcerting and
disastrous than its predecessor.  In the decades before the war,
though there were certainly variations in the real value of the
different currencies, they were variations within moderate limits,
and the rise or fall went on through comparatively long periods,
but after the war there commenced a series of movements in exchange
and prices unprecedented throughout the whole period of prosperity.
Currencies rose and towered above others and broke like Atlantic
waves, and people found the good money in their banks changed to
useless paper in a period of a few months.  It became more and
more difficult to carry on foreign trade because of the increasing
uncertainty of payment, and since there was scarcely a manufacturing
industry that had not to obtain some material from abroad, the
entanglement of foreign trade often involved a strangulation of
production at home.  Trade and industry sickened and lost heart more
and more in this disastrous uncertainty; it was like being in an
earthquake, when it seems equally unsafe to stand still or run away;
and the multitudes of unemployed increased continually.  The
economically combatant nations entrenched themselves behind tariffs,
played each other tricks with loans, repudiations, sudden inflations
and deflations, and no power in the world seemed able to bring them
into any concerted action to arrest and stop their common
dégringolade.</p><p>The opening years of the second third of the twentieth century saw
Homo sapiens in the strangest plight.  The planet had a healthier
and more abundant human population than it had ever carried before,
and it lacked nothing in its available resources to give the whole
of this population full and happy lives.  That was already the
material reality of the position.  But through nothing in the world
but a universal, various muddle–headedness, our species seemed
unable to put out its hand and take the abundance within its reach.
As we turn over the periodicals and literature of the time the
notes of apprehension and distress increase and deepen.  The war
period of 1914–1918 was full of suffering, but also it was full of
excitement; even the dying on the battlefields believed that a
compensatory peace and happiness lay close ahead.  The survivors
were promised "homes fit for heroes."  But the Depression of 1930
and onward was characterized by its inelasticity; it was a phase of
unqualified disappointment and hopelessly baffled protest.  One
lived, as one contemporary writer put it, "in a world bewitched".</p><p>The economic consequences of this monetary disorganization followed
hard upon it, but the deeper–lying destruction of social morale and
its effects were manifested less immediately.  The whole world
system heretofore had been sustained by the general good behavior
of common men, by the honesty and punctuality of clerks, workers of
every sort, traders, professional men.  General security depended
upon habitual decent behaviour in the street and on the
countryside.  But the common man behaved well because he had faith
that his pay was a safe, if sometimes a scanty, assurance of a
certain comfort and dignity in his life.  He imagined an implicit
bargain between himself and society that he should be given
employment and security in exchange for his law–abiding
subordination, and that society would keep faith with his savings.
He assumed that the governments would stand by the money they
issued and see that it gave him the satisfactions it promised him.
He was not a good boy for nothing.  Nobody is.  But now in various
terms and phrases all over the world millions of men and women were
asking themselves whether it "paid" to be industrious, skilful and
law–abiding.  The cement of confidence in the social fabric from
1918 onward was more and more plainly decaying and changing to
dust.  The percentage of criminal offences, which had been falling
through all the period of prosperity, rose again.</p></section><footer/></body></html>