<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>6: The Paradox of Over-production and Its Relation to War</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch01s05.xhtml" title="5: The Way in Which Competition and Monetary Inefficiency Strained the Old Order"/><link rel="next" href="ch01s07.xhtml" title="7: The Great War of 1914-1918"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="6: The Paradox of Over-production and Its Relation to War" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646504080"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">6: The Paradox of Over-production and Its Relation to War</h2></div></div></div><p>This so–called "paradox of over–production" which figures so
largely in the loose discussions of the "post–war" period was in
its essence a very simple affair indeed.  Just as the inevitable
end of a process of free competition was a consolidation of
successful competitors and an arrest of enterprise, so the
inevitable end of a search for profit in production was a steady
reduction of costs through increased efficiency—that is to say, a
steady decrease of the ratio of employment to output.  These things
lie so much on the surface of the process that it is almost
incredible to us that, wilfully or not, our ancestors disregarded
them.  Equally inevitable was it that these necessary contractions
of enterprise and employment should lead to an increase in the
proportion of unemployable people.  Geographical expansion and a
rising standard of life among both the employed and possessing
classes, together with the stimulating effect of a steady influx of
gold, masked and tempered for half a century this squeezing–out of
an increasing fraction of the species from its general economic
life.  There were nevertheless fluctuations, "cycles of trade" as
they were called, when the clogging machinery threatened to stall
and was then relieved and went on again.  But by the opening of the
twentieth century, the fact that the method of running human
affairs as an open competition for profit, was in its nature a
terminating method, was forcing itself upon the attention even of
those who profited most by it and had the most excuse for
disregarding it, and who, as a class, knew nothing of the Marxian
analysis.</p><p>We know now that the primary task of world administration is to
arrest this squeezing out of human beings from active economic
life, by the continual extension of new collective enterprises, but
such ideas had still to be broached at that time.  The common folk,
wiser in their instincts than the political economists in their
intellectualism, were disposed to approve of waste and extravagance
because money was "circulated" and workers "found employment".  And
the reader will not be able to understand the world–wide tolerance
of growing armaments and war preparations during this period unless
he realizes the immediate need inherent in the system for
unremunerative public expenditure.  Somewhere the energy economized
had to come out.  The world of private finance would not tolerate
great rehousing, great educational and socially constructive
enterprises, on the part of the relatively feeble governments of
the time.  All that had to be reserved for the profit accumulator.
And so the ever–increasing productivity of the race found its vent
in its ancient traditions of warfare, which admitted the withdrawal
of a large proportion of the male population from employment for a
year or so and secreted that vast accumulation of forts,
battleships, guns, submarines, explosives, barracks and the like,
which still amazes us.  Without this cancer growth of armies and
navies, the paradox of over–production latent in competitive
private enterprise would probably have revealed itself in an
overwhelming mass of unemployment before even the end of the
nineteenth century.  A social revolution might have occurred then.</p><p>Militarism, however, alleviated these revolutionary stresses, by
providing vast profit–yielding channels of waste.  And it also
strengthened the forces of social repression.  The means of
destruction accumulated on a scale that well–nigh kept pace with
the increase in the potential wealth of mankind.  The progressive
enslavement of the race to military tyranny was an inseparable
aspect, therefore, of free competition for profits.  The latter
system conditioned and produced the former.  It needed the former
so as to have ballast to throw out to destruction and death
whenever it began to sink.  The militarist phase of the early
twentieth century and the paradox of over–production are correlated
facets of the same reality, the reality of the planless hypertrophy
of the social body.</p><p>It is interesting to note how this morbid accumulation of energy in
belligerence and its failure to find vent in other directions
became more and more evident in the physiognomy of the world as the
twentieth century progressed.  The gatherings of mankind became
blotched with uniforms.  Those admirable albums of coloured
pictures, Historical Scenes in a Hundred Volumes, which are
now placed in all our schools and show–places and supplied
freely to any home in which there are children, display very
interestingly the advent, predominance and disappearance of
military preoccupations in the everyday life of our ancestors.
These pictures are all either reproductions of actual paintings,
engravings or photographs, or, in the case of the earlier volumes,
they are elaborate reconditionings to the more realistic methods of
our time of such illustrations as were available.  Military
operations have always attracted the picture–maker at all times,
and there are plentiful pictures of battles from every age, from
the little cricket–field battle of the Middle Ages to the hundred
mile fights of the last Great War, but our interest here is not
with battles but with the general facies of social life.  Even in
the war–torn seventeenth century the general stream of life went on
without any manifest soldiering.  War was a special occupation.
While the battles of the English Civil War, which set up the first
English Republic (1649–1660), were in progress, we have evidence
that hunting and hawking parties were busy almost within sound of
the guns.  The novels of Jane Austen (England, 1775–1817) pursue
their even way without the faintest echo of the land and sea
campaigns in progress.  Goethe in Weimar (the German literary
"Great Man" during the "Great Man" period of literary thought in
Europe, 1749–1832) could not be bothered by requests for supplies
of wood and food for the German troops before the battle of Jena,
and was very pleased to meet his "enemy alien" Napoleon socially
during that campaign.</p><p>We rarely see the monarchs of the eighteenth century depicted in
military guise; the fashion was for robes and majesty rather than
for the spurs and feathers of the Bantam warrior–king.  It was the
unprecedented vehemence of the Napoleonic adventure that splashed
the social life of Europe with uniforms, infected feminine
fashions, and even set plump princess colonels, frogged with gold
lace and clutching bare sabres, joggling unsteadily at the heads of
regiments.  There was a brief return towards civilian attire with
the accession of the "domesticated monarchs", Louis Philippe in
France and Victoria in Great Britain; they marked a transient
reaction from Napoleonic fashions; but from the middle of the
nineteenth century onward the prestige of the soldier resumed its
advance and the military uniform became increasingly pervasive.
Flags became more abundant in the towns and "flag–days" dotted the
calendar.  There was never a crowd pictured in Europe after 1870
without a soldier or so.</p><p>The Great War greatly intensified the military element in the
street population, not only in Europe but America.  Various corps
of feminine auxiliaries were enrolled during that time and paraded
the world thereafter in appetising soldierly outfits.  In the
United States, except at Washington, or when there was a parade of
civil war veterans, a soldier in uniform had been hitherto the
rarest of birds.  He would have felt strange and uncomfortable.  He
would have offended the susceptibilities of a consciously liberated
people.  The Great War changed all that.  When Germany was disarmed
after the war, a Nazi movement and a Reichsbanner movement supplied
the needed colour until a German's freedom to get into properly
recognized livery was restored.  The pattern of half–military,
half–civilian organizations in uniform had already been spread
about the world between the South African War (1899–1901) and the
Great War, by the Boy Scout movement.</p><p>Of the Nazi movement, the Italian Fascisti and the Polish
Brotherhood at least there will be more to tell later.  The black
and brown shirts may be cited here as instances of the visible
breaking–down of the boundaries between military and civil life
that went on during and after the World War.</p><p>Hitherto war had been a marginal business, fought upon "fronts",
and the ordinary citizen had lived in comparative security behind
the front, but the bombing, gas–diffusing aeroplane, and later the
long–range air torpedo, changed all that.  The extended use of
propaganda as a weapon, and the increasing danger of social mutiny
under war stress, had also its share in making the entire surface
of a belligerent country a war area and abolishing any vestiges of
civil liberty, first during actual warfare and then in view of
warfare.  The desirability of getting everyone under orders, under
oath, and subject to prompt disciplinary measures, became more and
more manifest to governments.</p><p>So within a century the appearance of the human crowd changed over
from a varied assembly of incoordinated free individuals to a
medley of uniforms.  Everybody's dress at last indicated function,
obligation and preparedness.  The militarization of the European
multitude reached a maximum during the Polish wars.  About 1942 gas
masks, either actually worn or hanging from the neck, were common
for a time, and so, too, were the small sheath–knives which were to
be used in disposing of fallen aviators who might still be alive.
Patella metal hats and metal epaulettes to protect the head and
body against a rain of poisoned needles also appeared.  Some
civilians became far more formidable–looking than any soldiers.</p><p>The military authorities of those days were much perplexed by the
problem of giving the general population protective apparatus and
light weapons that would be effective against the military enemy
and yet useless for the purposes of insurrection.  For in spite of
the most strenuous suppression of agitation in those troubled
decades, the possible revolt of humanity against warfare, the
possibility of complete "loss of morale", however illogical and
incoherent, was felt by the professional soldiers as an increasing
menace.</p><p>Along the streets of most of the old–world cities there presently
appeared the characteristic yellow (or in France blue, and in
America red–and–white–striped) air–raid pillars with their glass
faces, only to be broken into and used after an official alarm,
which contained respirators and first–aid sets for possible gas
victims.  It is also to the same period we have to ascribe the
multiplication of vivid and abundant direction signs at every
street corner, set so as to throw a minimum of light upward and
pointing the way to gas chambers and hospitals.  It was a "gas–
minded" world in the 'forties.  The practical suppression of other
vivid and illuminated street signs was a natural corollary to this
preoccupation.</p><p>In the first half of the twentieth century the cities blazed with
advertisement.  It was the period of maximum advertisement.  The
pictures of the Great White Way of New York, Piccadilly Circus, the
Grands Boulevards of Paris and so forth, with their polychromatic
visual clamour, still strike us as distractingly picturesque.
There was much flood–lighting after 1928.  Then progressively the
lights were turned down again and that visual clamour died away.
As the air threat returned, "lights out" became at last imperative,
except for the vivid furtive indications of refuge and first aid we
have just mentioned.</p><p>War fear spread very rapidly after 1930.  Darkness recaptured the
nocturnal town.  "Night–life" became stealthy and obscure, with an
increasing taint of criminality.  All civil hospitals and all
private doctors had disappeared from the world by 1945 and the
health services were only legally demilitarized again after 2010.
The amalgamation of the military and civil hospital and medical
services began in France as early as 1933.  By 1945 every doctor in
the Old World was, in theory at least, on a quasi–military footing;
he wore a distinctive uniform, was subject to stringent discipline,
and his premises, as well as the hospitals, bore the characteristic
black–and–yellow chequerwork.  All nurses were similarly enrolled.
Finally the general public was enrolled for health treatment as
common patients under oath.  By 1948 in such towns as had
sufficiently survived the general social demoralization to enforce
such regulations, it was impossible to take a chill or break an
ankle without at once falling into the category of patients and
being numbered, put into a black–and–yellow uniform and marched or
carried off for treatment.  Theoretically this system of treatment
was universal.  In practice neither the uniforms nor the doctors
were available.  For regulation and militarization were going on in
that period against an immense counter–drive towards social
disintegration.  The more humanity got into uniform, the shabbier
the uniforms became.</p><p>Before the Polish struggle, general architecture was very little
affected by military needs.  The militarization of costume preceded
the militarization of scenery.  Even barracks and such–like army
buildings were erected by army architects as a simple vulgarization
of ordinary housing patterns, a mere stiffening up, so to speak, of
the common "jerry–built" house.  There still survive for our
astonishment pictures of Victorian Military Gothic and Victorian
Military Tudor, produced under the British War Office.  They
display homes fit for drill–sergeants.  The military mind had to be
roused by the experiences of the Polish conflict to the profound
reconstruction of the ordinary town that had become necessary if it
was still to be taken seriously.  Before then, fortification
scarcely affected the urban scene at all, even in the case of a
fortified town.  Previously a fortress had been just an ordinary
civil town surrounded at distances of from three to fifty miles by
forts, strong points, trench systems and the like.  Now it was
realized, first in Berlin, and then in Danzig, Warsaw, Paris and
Turin, and after that by the whole world, that air warfare demanded
not merely fortification round a town, but much more imperatively,
fortification OVER a town.  The world, which had been far too
stupid to realize in 1930 that the direct way out of its economic
difficulties lay in the modernization and rebuilding of its houses,
set itself, in a state of war panic after 1942, to as complete a
revision of its architecture in the face of bombs and gas as its
deepening impoverishment permitted.  What it would not do for
prosperity, it attempted belatedly out of fear.</p><p>The first most obvious undertaking was the construction of those
immense usually ill–built concrete cavern systems for refuge, whose
vestiges are still to be visited by the curious tourist at Paris
and Berlin (the London ones have all fallen in, the collapse
beginning after the great landslip and fire), and close upon this
came the cessation of tall building and the concentration of design
upon the vast (and often dangerous) carapace roof and its gigantic
supporting pillars and foundation rafts.  Only the ever–deepening
poverty, the increasing industrial disorganization and the
transitoriness of that last war–phase saved all the towns in the
world from being thrust completely under such squat massive
coverings.</p><p>So strong were the influences of that time that even up to 2020 the
tendency of architectural design was to crouch.  Hardly any mass of
buildings erected between 1945 and the end of the century lifts up
its head and looks the world in the face.  That period has been
called, not unjustly, Second Egyptian.  And this was so in spite of
the multiplying opportunities for grace and lightness afforded by
the supersession of steel frame buildings by the strong and
flexible neo–concrete materials that were already available.  How
timidly they were used!  We grovel no longer because we are ceasing
to fear each other.  The soaring, ever improving homes in which we
live to–day would have sent our great–grandfathers scurrying to
their cellars in an ecstasy of terror.</p></section><footer/></body></html>