<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>10: Versailles: Seed Bed of Disasters</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch01s09.xhtml" title="9: The Direct Action of the Armament Industries in Maintaining War Stresses"/><link rel="next" href="ch01s11.xhtml" title="11: The Impulse to Abolish War: Why the League of Nations Failed to Pacify the World"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="10: Versailles: Seed Bed of Disasters" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646550240"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">10: Versailles: Seed Bed of Disasters</h2></div></div></div><p>The formal war, against the Central Powers, the "World War", ended
on November 11, 1918, C.E. in the defeat and submission of the
Central Powers.  There was a conference at Versailles, in the same
palace in which triumphant Germans had dictated peace to France
after a previous war in 1870–71.  There was a needlessly dramatic
flavour in this reversal of the rôles of the two countries.  It was
now France and her allies who dictated, and naturally the ideas of
a romantic restoration and a stern and righteous judgment dominated
the situation.  The assembled Powers sat down to right the wrongs
and punish the misdeeds of their grandparents.  Even at the time it
seemed a little belated.  But threading their proceedings we do
find quite plainly evident the developing conflict between
historical tradition and the quickening sense of human unity in the
world.  If the World–State was not present at the conference, its
voice was at any rate "heard without".</p><p>By this time (1919 C.E.) there was indeed quite a considerable
number of intelligent people in the world who had realized the
accumulating necessity of a world government, and a still larger
multitude, like that Henry Ford we have described, who had
apprehended it instinctively and sentimentally, but there was no
one yet who had had the intellectual vigour to attack in earnest
the problem of substituting a world system for the existing
governments.  Men's minds and hearts quailed before that
undertaking.  And yet, as we now know so clearly, it was the only
thing for them to do.  It was the sole alternative to an ever–
broadening and deepening series of disasters.  But its novelty and
vastness held them back.  Irrational habit kept them in the ancient
currents of history.</p><p>To us they seem like drowning men who were willing to attempt to
save themselves by rallies of swimming, floating, holding on to
straws and bubbles, but who refused steadfastly, in spite of the
proximity of a ladder, to clamber out of the water for good and
all.</p><p>Hardly any of them in their ideas of a world system dared go beyond
a purely political agreement for the avoidance of war.  Five
decades of human distress were still needed before there was to be
any extensive realization that belligerence was only one symptom,
and by no means the gravest symptom, of human disunion.</p><p>The American President Woodrow Wilson, of all the delegates to the
Peace Conference, was the most susceptible to the intimations of
the future.  The defects and limitations of his contributions to
that settlement give us a measure of the political imagination of
those days.  He brought what was left of the individualistic
liberalism that had created the American Republics to the solution
of the world problem.  None of the other participants in these
remarkable discussions—Clemenceau (France), Lloyd George
(Britain), Sonnino (Italy), Saionji (Japan), Hymans (Belgium),
Paderewski (Poland), Bratianu (Roumania), Benes (Bohemia),
Venezelos (Greece), Feisal (Hedjaz), and so on through a long
list of now fading names—seemed aware that, apart from any
consideration of national advantage, humanity as a whole might
claim an interest in the settlement.  They were hard–shell
"representatives", national advocates.  For a brief interval Wilson
stood alone for mankind.  Or at least he seemed to stand for
mankind.  And in that brief interval there was a very extraordinary
and significant wave of response to him throughout the earth.  So
eager was the situation that all humanity leapt to accept and
glorify Wilson—for a phrase, for a gesture.  It seized upon him as
its symbol.  He was transfigured in the eyes of men.  He ceased to
be a common statesman; he became a Messiah.  Millions believed him
as the bringer of untold blessings; thousands would gladly have
died for him.  That response was one of the most illuminating
events in the early twentieth century.  Manifestly the World–State
had been conceived then, and now it stirred in the womb.  It was
alive.</p><p>And then for some anxious decades it ceased to stir.</p><p>Amidst different scenery and in different costumes, the story of
Wilson repeats the story of Ford, the story of a man lifted by an
idea too great for him, thrown up into conspicuousness for a little
while and then dropped, as a stray leaf may be spun up and dropped
by a gust of wind before a gale.  The essential Wilson, the world
was soon to learn, was vain and theatrical, with no depth of
thought and no wide generosity.  So far from standing for all
mankind, he stood indeed only for the Democratic Party in the
United States—and for himself.  He sacrificed the general support
of his people in America to party considerations and his prestige
in Europe to a craving for social applause.  For a brief season he
was the greatest man alive.  Then for a little while he remained
the most conspicuous.  He visited all the surviving courts of
Europe and was fêted and undone in every European capital.  That
triumphal procession to futility need not occupy us further here.
Our concern is with his idea.</p><p>Manifestly he wanted some sort of a world pax.  But it is doubtful
if at any time he realized that a world pax means a world control
of all the vital common interests of mankind.  He seems never to
have thought out this job to which he set his hand so confidently.
He did not want, or, if he did, he did not dare to ask for, any
such centralized world controls as we now possess.  They were
probably beyond the range of his reading and understanding.  His
project from first to last was purely a politician's project.</p><p>The pattern conceived by him was a naïve adaptation of the
parliamentary governments of Europe and America to a wider union.
His League, as it emerged from the Versailles Conference, was a
typical nineteenth–century government enlarged to planetary
dimensions and greatly faded in the process; it had an upper
chamber, the Council, and a lower chamber, the Assembly, but, in
ready deference to national susceptibilities, it had no executive
powers, no certain revenues, no army, no police, and practically no
authority to do anything at all.  And even as a political body it
was remote and ineffective; it was not in any way representative of
the peoples of the earth as distinguished from the governments of
the earth.  Practically nothing was done to make the common people
of the world feel that the League was theirs.  Its delegates were
appointed by the Foreign Offices of the very governments its only
conceivable rôle was to supersede.  They were national politicians
and they were expected to go to Geneva to liquidate national
politics.  The League came into being at last, a solemn simulacrum
to mock, cheat and dispel the first desire for unity that mankind
had ever betrayed.</p><p>Yet what else was possible then?  If Wilson seemed to embody the
formless aspirations of mankind, there can be no dispute that he
impressed the politicians with whom he had to deal as a profoundly
insincere visionary.  They dealt with him as that and they beat him
as that.  The only way to have got anything more real than this
futile League would have been a revolutionary appeal to the war–
weary peoples of the earth against their governments, to have said,
as indeed he could have said in 1918, to the whole world that the
day of the World–State had come.  That would have reverberated to
the ends of the earth.</p><p>He was not the man to do that.  He had not that power of
imagination.  He had not that boldness with governments.  He had
the common politician's way of regarding great propositions as a
means to small ends.  If he had been bolder and greater, he might
have failed, he might have perished; but he failed and perished
anyhow; and a bolder bid for world unity might have put the real
issue before mankind for ever and shortened the Age of Frustration
by many decades.</p><p>What he did do was to reap an immediate harvest of popular
applause, to present to human hope a white face rigid with self–
approval, bowing from processional carriages and decorated
balconies, retiring gravely into secret conference with the
diplomatists and politicians of the old order and emerging at last
with this League of Nations, that began nothing and ended nothing
and passed in a couple of decades out of history.</p><p>It was a League not to end sovereignties but preserve them.  It
stipulated that the extraordinarily ill–contrived boundaries
established by the Treaty in which it was incorporated should be
guaranteed by the League for EVERMORE.  Included among other
amiable arrangements were clauses penalizing Germany and her allies
as completely as Carthage was penalized by Rome after the disaster
of Zamia—penalizing her in so overwhelming a way as to make
default inevitable and afford a perennial excuse for her continued
abasement.  It was not a settlement, it was a permanent punishment.
The Germans were to become the penitent helots of the conquerors; a
generation, whole generations, were to be born and die in debt, and
to ensure the security of this arrangement Germany was to be
effectually disarmed and kept disarmed.</p><p>Delenda est Germanic was the sole idea of the French (see Morris
Henbane's Study of Pertinax, 1939) and the representatives of the
other Allies who were gathered together in the Paris atmosphere,
and, working amidst the vindictive memories of Versailles, were
only too ready to fall in with this punitive conception of their
task.  It was the easiest conception; it put a hundred difficult
issues into a subordinate place.  It always looks so much easier to
men of poor imagination to put things back than to carry them on.
If the French dreaded a resurrection of the German armies, the
British feared a resurrection of the German fleet and of German
industrial competition.  Japan and Italy, seeking their own
compensations elsewhere, were content to see the German–speaking
peoples, who constituted the backbone of the continent, divided and
reduced to vassalage.</p><p>The antiquated form of Wilson's ideas produced still more
mischievous consequences in the multiplication of sovereign
governments in the already congested European area.  Deluded by the
vague intimations of unity embodied in the League, Wilson lent
himself readily to a reconstruction of the map of Europe upon
strictly nationalist lines.  The Polish nation was restored.  Our
history has already studied the successive divisions of this
country in the eighteenth century.  It is a great region of the
Central Plain, whose independent existence became more and more
inconvenient as the trade and commerce of Europe developed.
Geography fought against it.  It was a loose–knit union of
individualistic equestrian aristocrats dominating a peasantry.  But
its partition between Russia, Prussia and Austria was achieved with
the utmost amount of brutality, and after the Napoleonic wars a
romantic legend about this lost kingdom of Poland seized upon the
sentiment of France, Britain and America.  These rude nobles and
their serfs, so roughly incorporated by the adjacent states, were
transfigured into a delicate, brave and altogether wonderful
people, a people with a soul torn asunder and trampled underfoot by
excessively booted oppressors.  The restoration of Poland—the
excessive restoration of Poland—was one of the brightest ambitions
of President Wilson.</p><p>Poland was restored.  But instead of a fine–spirited and generous
people emerging from those hundred and twenty years of subjugation,
and justifying the sympathy and hopes of liberalism throughout the
world, there appeared a narrowly patriotic government, which
presently developed into an aggressive, vindictive and pitiless
dictatorship, and set itself at once to the zestful persecution of
the unfortunate ethnic minorities (about a third of the entire
population) caught in the net of its all too ample boundaries.  The
real Poland of the past had been a raiding and aggressive nation
which had ridden and harried to the very walls of Moscow.  It had
not changed its nature.  The Lithuanian city of Vilna was now
grabbed by a coup de main and the southeastern boundary pushed
forward in Galicia.  In the treatment of the Ukrainians and
Ruthenians involved in liberation, Poland equalled any of the
atrocities which had been the burden of her song during her years
of martyrdom.  In 1932 one–third of the budget of this new militant
Power was for armament.</p><p>Not only was Poland thus put back upon the map.  As a result of a
sedulous study of historical sentimentalities, traditions, dialects
and local feelings, a whole cluster of new sovereign Powers,
Czechoslovakia, Jugoslavia, Finland, Esthonia, Latvia, Lithuania,
an attenuated Hungary and an enlarged Roumania, was evoked to crowd
and complicate the affairs of mankind by their sovereign liberties,
their ambitions, hostilities, alliances, understandings,
misunderstandings, open and secret treaties, tariffs, trade wars
and the like.  Russia was excluded from the first attempt at a
World Parliament because she had repudiated her vast war debts—
always a matter of grave solicitude to the Western creditor, and—
strangest fact of all in this strange story—the United States, the
Arbitrator and Restorer of Nations, stood out from the League,
because President Wilson's obstinate resolve to monopolize the
immortal glory of World Salvation for himself and his party had
estranged a majority of his senators.</p><p>The Senate, after some attempts at compromise, rejected the
Covenant of the League altogether, washed its hands of world
affairs, and the President, instead of remaining for ever Prince of
Everlasting Peace and Wonder of the Ages, shrank again very rapidly
to human proportions and died a broken and disappointed man.  Like
Ford, the United States returned to normal business and the Profit
and Loss Account, and the Europeans were left with the name of
Wilson written all over their towns, upon streets, avenues,
esplanades, railway stations, parks and squares, to make what they
could of this emasculated League he had left about among their
affairs.</p><p>If Russia and Germany in their character of Bad Peoples were
excluded from the League, such remote peoples as the Chinese and
the Japanese were included as a matter of course.  It was assumed,
apparently, that they were "just fellows" of the universal Treaty–
of–Westphalia pattern.  The European world knew practically nothing
of the mental processes of these remote and ancient communities,
and it seems hardly to have dawned upon the conferring statesmen
that political processes rest entirely upon mental facts.  The
League, after much difficulty, and after some years' delay, did
indeed evolve a Committee of Intellectual Cooperation, but so far
as its activities can now be traced, this was concerned with
dilettante intellectualism only; there is no indication that it
ever interested itself in the League as an idea.</p><p>Considering all things in the light of subsequent events, it would
have been well if the League of Nations had committed hara–kiri
directly the United States Senate refused participation, and if the
European Powers, realizing their failure to stabilize the planet at
one blow, had set themselves at once to the organization of a
League of Conciliation and Cooperation within the European area.
The League's complete inability to control or even modify the
foreign policy of Japan (modelled on the best nineteenth–century
European patterns) was the decisive factor in its declension to a
mere organization of commentary upon current affairs.</p><p>As its authority declined the courage and pungency of its reports
increased.  Some of the later ones are quite admirable historical
documents.  Gradually the member governments discontinued their
subsidies and the secretariat dwindled to nothing.  Like the Hague
Tribunal, the League faded out of existence before or during the
Famished Fifties.  It does not figure in history after the first
Polish war, but its official buildings were intact in 1965, and in
1968, and for some years later, they were used as auxiliary offices
by the Western branch of the Transport Union.</p><p>The imposition of vast monetary payments upon Germany was the only
part of the settlement of Versailles that dealt with the financial
and economic life of our race.  Astounding as this seems to us to–
day, it was the most natural oversight possible to the Versailles
politicians.  Political life was still deep in the old purely
combatant tradition, still concentrated upon boundaries and
strategic advantages; and it was extraordinarily innocent in the
face of economic realities.  The mighty forces demanding economic
unification, albeit they were, as we have shown, the real causes of
the Great War, were ignored at Versailles as completely as if they
had never existed.</p><p>Only one outstanding voice, that of the British economist J. M.
Keynes (Economic Consequences of the Peace, 1919), was audible at
the time in protest and warning against the preposterous
dislocation of credit and trade involved in the reparation
payments.  There was no arrangement whatever for the liquidation of
the debts piled up by the Allies AGAINST EACH OTHER (!), and no
economic parallel to the political League of Nations.  No control
of economic warfare was even suggested.  The Americans, Wilson
included, were still in a stage of financial individualism; they
thought money–getting was an affair of individual smartness within
the limits of the law, and the American conception of law was of
something that presented interesting obstacles rather than
effectual barriers to enlightened self–seeking.  The contemporary
American form of mutual entertainment was a poker party, and that
great people therefore found nothing inimical in sitting down after
the war to play poker, with France and Great Britain as its chief
opponents, for the gold and credit of the world.</p><p>It was only slowly during the decade following after the war that
the human intelligence began to realize that the Treaty of
Versailles had not ended the war at all.  It had set a truce to the
bloodshed, but it had done so only to open a more subtle and
ultimately more destructive phase in the traditional struggle of
the sovereign states.  The existence of independent sovereign
states IS war, white or red, and only an elaborate mis–education
blinded the world to this elementary fact.  The peoples of the
defeated nations suffered from a real if not very easily defined
sense of injustice in this Treaty, which was framed only for them
to sign, and sign in the rôle of wrongdoers brought to book.  Very
naturally they were inspired by an ill–concealed resolve to revise,
circumvent or disregard its provisions at the earliest possible
opportunity.  The conquering Powers, on the other hand, were
conscious of having not only humiliated their defeated enemies but
thrust them into a state of exasperated disadvantage.  The thought
of a revanche was equally present therefore to the victors, and
instead of disarming as the Germans were compelled to do, they
broke the obligations of the Treaty and retained and increased
their military establishments.</p><p>The armament firms and their newspapers naturally did all they
could to intensify this persistence in an armed "security".  Any
disposition on the part of the French public, for instance, to lay
aside its weapons was promptly checked by tales of secret arsenals
and furtive drilling in Germany.  And the narrow patriotic forces
that guided France not only kept her extravagantly armed against
her fallen foe, but carried on a subtle but ruthless financial
warfare that, side by side with the American game, overcame every
effort of Germany to recover socially or economically.</p><p>Moreover, the conquering Powers, so soon as they considered their
former antagonists conclusively disposed of, turned themselves
frankly, in full accordance with the traditions of the sovereign
state system, to the task of getting the better of each other in
the division of the spoils.  Their "Alliances" had brought about no
sense of community.  Already within a year of the signing of the
Peace Treaty of Versailles heavy fighting was going on in Asia
Minor between the Greeks and the Turks.  The Greeks had British
encouragement; the French and Italians had supported the Turks.  It
was a war of catspaws.  This war culminated in a disastrous rout of
the Greeks and the burning of the town of Smyrna.  This last was a
quite terrible massacre; multitudes of women and children were
outraged, men and boys gouged, emasculated or killed; all but the
Turkish quarter was looted and burnt.  The quays in front of the
flaming town were dense with terror–stricken crowds, hoping against
hope to get away upon some ship before they were fallen upon,
robbed, butchered, or thrust into the water.</p><p>A little before this the Turks had driven the French out of the
ancient province of Cilicia, and had completed the extermination of
that ancient people the Hittites or Armenians.  During the war or
after the war mattered little to the Armenians, for fire and sword
pursued them still.  Over two million died—for the most part
violent deaths.</p><p>Fighting still went on after the Great Peace in the north and south
of Russia and in eastern Siberia; and China became a prey to armies
of marauders.  Poland seized Vilna, invaded eastern Galicia and
fought Russia in the Ukraine, and a raid of patriotic Italians
expelled a mixed Allied garrison from Fiume.</p><p>Presently there was a dreadful famine in south–east Russia which
neither America nor Europe was able to alleviate.  Always before
the war a famine in any part of the world had exercised the
philanthropic element in the Anglo–Saxon community.  But
philanthropy had lost heart.  There was a faint but insufficient
flutter of the old habits in America but none in Britain.</p><p>Such was the peace and union of the world immediately achieved by
the Conference of Versailles.</p><p>A number of unsatisfactory appendices and patches had presently to
be made to correct the most glaring defects and omissions of the
Treaty.  Constantinople, which had been taken from the Turks and
held by a mixed force of the Allies, was restored to them in 1923
after the Smyrna massacre and some warlike gesticulation between
them and the British.</p><p>In drawing the boundaries of the new and revised states of the
European patchwork there was the utmost disregard of economic
commonsense; peasants would find themselves cut off from winter or
summer pasture or from market towns which had been developed by
their needs.  Great foundries and chemical and metallurgical works
were separated from the ores and deposits on which they relied.
Vienna, once the financial and business centre of all south–east
Central Europe, was decapitated.  Most fantastic and, as it proved,
most disastrous of all the follies of Versailles, was the creation
of the free city of Danzig and what was called the Polish Corridor.</p><p>Let us note a point or so about this latter tangle to illustrate
the mental quality of the Conference at its worst.  Here more than
anywhere else did the simple romantic idea that the Germans were
Bad, and that anyone opposed to the Germans was without
qualification Good, rule the situation.  The Poles were Good, and
they were the chosen of the Allies, the particular protégés of the
sentimental historian from America.  He had come to put down the
mighty from their seats and to exalt the humble and the meek.  The
hungry and eager were to be filled with good things and the rich,
the erstwhile rich, were to be sent empty away.  Germany, like
Dives in hell, was to look up and see Poland like Lazarus in
Woodrow Wilson's bosom.  Not only were the Good Poles to be given
dominion over Ruthenians, Ukrainians, Jews (whom particularly they
detested), Lithuanians, White Russians and Germans, they were to
have also something of profound economic importance—"access to the
sea".</p><p>On that President Wilson had been very insistent.  Switzerland had
done very well in pre–war Europe without access to the sea, but
that was another story.  The difficulty was that by no stretch of
ethnic map–colouring could Poland be shown to border on the sea.  A
belt of Pomeranians and Germans stretched across the mouth of the
Vistula, and the only possibility of a reasonable trading outlet to
the sea, so far as Poland needed such an outlet—for most of its
trade was with its immediate neighbours—was through an
understanding with that belt of people.  That would have been easy
enough to arrange.  At the mouth of the Vistula stood the entirely
German city of Danzig.  It lived mainly as an outlet for Polish
trade, and it could prosper in no other way.  There was no reason
to suppose it would put any difficulties in the way of Polish
imports and exports.  It was an ancient, honest, clean and
prosperous German city.  Ninety–six per cent of its inhabitants
were German.</p><p>This was the situation to which the Conference of Versailles, under
the inspiration of that magic phrase "access to the sea", turned
its attention.  Even the profound belief of the Conquerors that
there were no Germans but bad Germans could not justify their
turning over Danzig itself to Polish rule.  But they separated it
from Germany and made it into a "free city", and to the west of it
they achieved that "access to the sea" of Wilson's, by annexing a
broad band of Pomeranian territory to Poland.  (This was the actual
"Corridor" of the controversies.)  It had no port to compare with
Danzig, but the Poles set themselves to create a rival in Gdynia,
which should be purely Polish, and which should ultimately starve
the trading Germans out of Danzig.</p><p>And to keep the waters of the Vistula as pure and sweet for Poland
as the existence of Danzig at the estuary allowed, the peace–makers
ran the Vistula boundary between Poland and east Prussia, not in
the usual fashion midway along the stream, but at a little distance
on the east Prussian side.  (Jacques Kayser, La Paix en Péril,
1931; Hist. Doc., 711711.)  So that the east German population, the
peasant cultivator, the erstwhile fisherman, the shepherd with his
flocks to water, was pulled up by a line of frontier posts and a
Polish rifle within sight of the stream.  Moreover, that eastward
country was flat and low–lying and had hitherto been protected from
floods and a relapse to marsh conditions by a line of dykes.  The
frontier cut that line five times, and since the Poles had no
interest whatever in these defences, they fell rapidly out of
repair.  Further along the boundary cut off the great towns of
Garnsee and Bischofswerder from their railway station.</p><p>But we must not lose ourselves in the details of this exasperating
settlement.  The maximum of irritation developed in the absurd
Corridor itself.  The current of traffic had hitherto run to and
fro between east and west, the trend of the railways was in that
direction; the traffic in the north and south direction had come to
Danzig along the great river.  Now the Poles set themselves to
obstruct both these currents and to wrench round all the
communications into a north and south direction avoiding Danzig.
Every German going east or west found himself subjected to a series
of frontier examinations, to tariff payments, to elaborate delays,
to such petty but memorable vexations as that all the windows of an
express train passing across the Corridor should be closed, and so
forth, and the city of Danzig, cut off from German trade, found its
Polish business being steadily diverted to Gdynia.  French capital
was poured into Gdynia and into its new railway to the south, so
that French financial interests were speedily entangled in the
dispute.</p><p>The indignity and menace of Danzig burnt into the German
imagination.  That Corridor fretted it as nothing else in the peace
settlement had fretted it.  It became a dominant political issue.
There was an open sore of a similar character in Upper Silesia;
there was a sore in the Saar Valley; there was the sore of an
enforced detachment from Austria; there were many other bitter
memories and grievances, but this was so intimate, so close to
Berlin, that it obsessed all German life.</p><p>Within a dozen years of the signing of the Treaty of Versailles the
Polish Corridor was plainly the most dangerous factor in the
European situation.  It mocked every projection of disarmament.  It
pointed the hypnotized and impotent statescraft of Europe straight
towards a resumption of war.  A fatalistic attitude towards war as
something terrible indeed but inevitable, which had already been
evident among the politicians of Europe before 1914, reappeared and
spread.</p><p>History had an air of repeating itself.  Nobody made any definite
suggestions about any of these open sores, but there was scarcely a
politician of the period who could not claim to have been very
eloquent on various occasions against war—with, of course, a
skilful avoidance of anything that could be considered specific,
controversial, unpatriotic or likely to wound the susceptibilities
of the Powers immediately concerned.</p></section><footer/></body></html>