<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>7: The Great War of 1914-1918</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch01s06.xhtml" title="6: The Paradox of Over-production and Its Relation to War"/><link rel="next" href="ch01s08.xhtml" title="8: The Impulse to Abolish War; the Episode of the Ford Peace Ship"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="7: The Great War of 1914-1918" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646521720"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">7: The Great War of 1914-1918</h2></div></div></div><p>There is a monstrous tedious accumulation of records concerned with
the World War.  The Catalogue of Historical Material stored at
Atacama gives a list of 2,362,705 books and gross files, up to
date, and of these over 182,000 deal exclusively or largely with
the causation of the war.  Nothing could bring home to the student
the profound difference in mental equipment between ourselves and
the men and women of that period than a visit to the long silent
galleries of that great library of dead disputes and almost
completely forgotten records.  He will see hardly a visitor along
the vistas of that shining framework of shelves; a quiet cleaner or
duster perhaps will be visible, scrutinizing the condition of the
material, or a young revisionist student patiently checking some
current summary—or a black cat.  For the rest, above, below, to
right and left is a clean and luminous stillness; papers at rest.</p><p>In one large section of this sere honeycomb the student will find
the records of the "war guilt controversy" that agitated the world
for decades after the Peace of Versailles.  Let him draw out a seat
anywhere and take down a file or so at hazard and turn over its
pages.  He will be able to read almost all of it nowadays, whatever
the original language, because practically all the collection has
now been interleaved with translations into Basic English.  And it
will seem to him that he is reading the outpourings of lunatics, so
completely have the universal obsessions of that time been
exorcized since.</p><p>Had "Germany" planned the war?  Was "France" the guilty party?  Had
"Britain" much to answer for?  With difficulty will the student let
down his mind into the fantastic world of extinct imaginations in
which these strange personifications, as monstrous and incredible
as the ancient gods of India, were treated as real and morally
responsible individuals, hated, trusted, feared and loved.  The war
was, in immediate fact, an aimless and fruitless slaughter upon the
altars of these stupendous deities, the wounding and mutilation of
perhaps twenty million human beings, and a vast burning–up of
material wealth.  In the crazy fancy of our ancestors it was a
noble and significant struggle.  Happily we need not revive their
craziness here.  The question of "war guilt" was never settled.  It
ceased to be pursued, it was neglected, it floated away into the
absurd, and little but those three hundred feet or so of forgotten
books and gross files remain to testify to its vanished importance.</p><p>The causation of the struggle was, indeed, perfectly simple.  It
arose naturally and necessarily from that irregular and
disproportionate growth of human appliances as compared with the
extension of political and social intelligence we have already
described.</p><p>The new means of communication and transport, and the new economic
life which demanded the products of every zone and soil for its
purposes, were necessitating the reorganization of human affairs as
a World–State, and since the world was already parcelled up among
sixty–odd competing sovereign governments there were only two
possible courses open to mankind, either to arrange the coalescence
of these governments by treaty and rational arrangements to meet
the new need, or to allow a steadily intensified mutual pressure to
develop into more or less thinly disguised attempts at world
conquest.  In the decades before the war the British, French,
German, Russian, Japanese and American systems were all, as the
word went then, "imperialist"—all, that is, attempting to become
World–States on a planet on which obviously there was room only for
one single World–State.  Nothing of the sort had been apparent when
the methods of European statescraft had been devised.  These vaster
possibilities had yawned open afterwards.  The eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries were centuries of small restricted wars for
limited advantages.  In the twentieth century the scale of war
expanded beyond any limit and the advantages to be won by it
disappeared.  But the politicians and diplomatists played their
time–honoured game against each other with a sort of terrified
inevitability.  They were driven; they had no control, or at least
none of them seemed to have had the vigour and imagination to
attempt a control.  They were driven by the economic necessity we
have explained in the previous section.  They had to arm
preposterously.  They had to threaten.  They had to go through with
the business.</p><p>These forces account for the outbreak and universality of the Great
War, but they do not account for its peculiar frightfulness.  For
that it is necessary to realize that though governments expanded
only against an enormous pressure of mutual restraint, no
limitations had been set to the hypertrophy of financial and
industrial enterprises.  These last were under the sway of a
relentless and unrestrained progress; they expanded, invented,
urged and sold; they brought weapons of a strange and terrible
effectiveness to the settlement of what were in comparison small
and antiquated disputes.  To that hypertrophy of the armourer we
will return presently, because the Great War was really only a
first revelation of this particular disproportion between economics
and politics, and the evil still went on in an exaggerated form
after the formal conclusion of the struggle at the Peace of
Versailles (1919).  But let us first tell what needs to be known of
the details of the Great War.</p><p>How little that is now!  There is a vast literature both of fiction
based on experience and of personal reminiscence about it, and some
of it is admirably written; almost any of it may be read for
interest and edification and hardly any of it need be read with
scholarly precision.  The picture of the outbreak of the war still
touches us.  There was a curious unconsciousness of the grossness
of the menace in events, even on the part of myriads doomed to
suffer and die in a few months' time.  Many of the stories told
begin with a holiday party or a country–house gathering or some
such bright setting.  The weather that August (1914) was
exceptionally fine.</p><p>The details of the struggle itself were as horrible and distressing
as they were inconsequent, and there is no need whatever for anyone
but the specialist to master their sequence in detail.  The old–
fashioned history, with its lists of names, dates, battles and so
on, was designed rather to supply easily marked material for
examinations than to give any sense of the historical process.
Examinations have long passed out of educational practice; they
have gone to join the "globes" and the abacus, the slate and the
cane in the scholastic limbo, but their memory is preserved in the
popular game of "examination papers", when people write down as
fast as they can and as much as they can about some suddenly
selected subject.</p><p>Few of us could write even a brief account now of the World War.
The names of such generals as Haig, Kitchener, French, Joffre, Foch
and Ludendorff, to take names at random, and such battles as
Tannenberg, the Marne, the Somme, Paschendaele, the Falkland Isles,
Jutland and so forth, mean nothing and need mean nothing to the
ordinary citizen to–day.  He does not know whether French was
really French or not, nor whether Foch was a Frenchman or a German.
He inclines to the latter view.  He does not know who won or lost
these conflicts and he does not care.  He has not even a sporting
interest in it.  They were not lively fights.  Nearly all the
commanders concerned had dull and unattractive personalities and
the business was altogether too unwieldy for them.  Most of their
operations were densely stupid, muddled both in conception and
execution.  One would as soon listen to a child reciting not very
accurately and at endless length the deals and tricks of some game
of cards it has played, or imagines it has played, as read their
memoirs—packed as they too often are with self–exculpation,
personal resentments and malice.  Faint, faded, immense and far–off
tragedies, these struggles that were to have astounded posterity
have already gone far towards complete effacement in any but a few
specializing minds, are hardly more vivid now in our collective
consciousness than the battles of the Peloponnesian War—or the
campaigns and conquests of Tamerlane.  They had nothing of the
primary historical importance and strategic splendour which have
restored the gigantic military conceptions of Genghis Khan to an
integral place in our ordinary educational curriculum.</p><p>For the rodomontade of the conflict the curious cannot do better
than glance through the eager narrative of Winston Churchill's
World Crisis.  There one finds all the stereotyped flourishes and
heroisms of nineteenth–century history from the British point of
view; the "drama of history" in rich profusion, centred upon one of
the most alert personalities in the conflict.  He displays a
vigorous naïve puerility that still gives his story an atoning
charm.  He has the insensitiveness of a child of thirteen.  His
soldiers are toy soldiers and he loves to knock over a whole row of
them.  He enjoyed the war.  He takes himself and all the now
forgotten generals and statesmen of the war with a boyish
seriousness.  He passes grave judgments on their tragic fooleries
and distributes compliments and blame, often in the most gracious
manner, convinced that he is writing for a meticulously admiring
and envious posterity.  They would read, they would marvel.  He was
the sort of man who believed that when he begot children he created
an audience.  He was misled by the excitement of his own reading of
history.  He not only measures for us the enormous gulf between the
mentality of his times and our own, but he enables us to bridge
that gulf with an amused and forgiving sympathy.</p><p>A less attractive spirit displays itself in the memoirs of such
figures as Ludendorff, Bülow, Clemenceau, Fisher, Foch, and so
through the whole category of war leaders.  The war was the supreme
event in the lives of most of these men and apparently they were
never able to think of anything else afterwards.  They had none of
the recuperative innocence of Churchill, his terrier–like interest
in everything.  They all took to writing furiously in their
declining years and no other pens could have damned them so
completely.  They are grown–up and yet under–developed persons;
as adult as old chimpanzees; they cannot claim Churchill's benefit
of schoolboy, and there is a real horror in their wrinkled
meannesses and envies, their gross enthusiasms and their sincere
bloodthirstiness and hate.  Most of their mutual recriminations are
too incomprehensible to be of the slightest interest now; spite and
twaddle are still spite and twaddle even if drenched with blood.
The most accessible sample for the contemporary reader is The Life
and Diaries of Field–Marshal Sir Henry Wilson, Bart., G.C.B.,
D.S.O., a lean, unsightly man of infinite energy, gusto and vanity,
who played a very prominent rôle in bringing about and carrying out
the catastrophe.  It is the latest reprint in the Historical
Documents Series; it is richly illustrated and abundantly
annotated, and with it are bound up the brilliantly scornful
criticisms of Wilson's contemporary, Sir Andrew Macphail, and
Stephen Freudheim's more scientific analysis of him as the supreme
type of the "soldierly mind".</p><p>For the grimmer actualities of the struggle there is a vast and
sombre literature.  It has been summarized in the last fifteen
years by the Historical Bureau in its War Pictures for Posterity by
Pen, Pencil and Camera.  Everyone should turn over those strange
incredible records of endurance, callousness, devotion and insane
courage, to learn something of the extremes to which men and women
like ourselves can be pushed by the grim forces of social
compulsion.</p><p>The earlier volumes deal chiefly with the psychology of the more
than half civilized citizens of the Atlantic and North European
states suddenly precipitated into a maelstrom of destruction.  We
see the urban crowds demonstrating and cheering in the streets of
the capital cities, the floods of youths coming from their work to
"join up", the wonder and unimaginative fierceness and heroism of
the opening stage.  Then come the first contacts, villages in
flames, the wild shooting of curious bystanders as spies and
guerillas, realizations of horror and a wave of fear, the invaded
populations in flight, black crowds with their pitiful impedimenta
streaming along darkling roads, going they know not whither.  The
rifles and machine–guns rattle, the guns thud, and the cheering
adventurousness of the advancing armies as they blunder heavily
into contact passes into a phase of astounded violence and
hardship.  The new war was like no war that had ever been before.
The French upon their eastern front went forward to the attack with
immense élan, in bright uniforms and to the historical inspiration
of the "Marseillaise".  They were massacred.  They lost a third of
a million men in three weeks.  The Germans poured through Belgium,
more than a million strong, to be stopped and stunned with Paris
almost within their grasp.  The pictures show the smiling landscape
of eastern Belgium, France and east Prussia in July 1914, and the
same countryside a couple of months later—torn, scored and
trenched, defiled with bloody heaps of litter that were once
clothed bodies, an anguish of countless thousands of unclean,
hungry, exhausted, cruelty–wrung human beings.</p><p>These bands of contact, these regions of filthy pain and tumult,
spread.  Presently there were "war zones" reaching from the North
Sea to the Alps and across Eastern Europe, strange regions in which
every house was a ruin, every tree a splintered trunk, where
millions of crouching men went to and fro in trenches and ditches
furtively like rats, and the ragged dead lay unburied.  There day
and night the superfluous energy of a profiteering economic system,
denied all other outlet by its own preconceptions and the rigid
historical traditions in which it was blinkered, blew itself away
in the incessant concussions of mines, bombs and guns and a
continued destruction of human life.</p><p>Presently newly invented weapons, hitherto untried, came to extend
and intensify the struggle.  The aeroplane, and that primitive
"navigable" the Zeppelin, carried the war behind the fronts and
attacked the civilian population in the cities.  We see the
explosive and incendiary bombs bursting into the dirty little urban
homes of the time, blowing to rags the bed–rid grandmother and the
baby in the cradle; we see the panic–stricken crowds seeking the
shelter of cellars and excavations and the drainlike railway
"tubes" of the time.  In the early stages of the air–war only
explosives and inflammatory substances were used, but as the
struggle progressed the art of using gas bombs developed, and an
agonizing suffocation was added to the nocturnal chances of flame
and explosion and death among fallen ruins for the non–combatant at
home.  The submarine, also, was a novelty of the Great War, and a
very searching novelty.  It was used first to sink fighting ships
and then it was turned against all sea–going craft.  We have vivid
descriptions of the sinking of the Lusitania without warning and
the drowning of 1,198 men, women and children.  She was, by the
standards of the time, a great and luxurious ship, and a sort of
symbolism was found by the writers of this period in this sudden
descent from light, comfort and confidence into a desperate and
hopeless struggle in the waters of the night.  All the achievements
of nineteenth–century civilization seemed to many to be following
in the downward wake of the Lusitania.</p><p>Service in these early submarines strained men to the breaking
point.  They were essentially engines of war, they had all the
defects of inventions at an early stage, and none of the security
and comfort of the great submarine barges that are used to–day for
the Mediterranean and Atlantic Ridge mines and for general deep sea
exploration.  These, with their beautifully adjusted pressure
systems and their limitless vertical range, are calculated rather
to mislead than enlighten us as to the capabilities of the
primitive submarines of the Great War.  The latter were able to
descend safely only to a depth of a hundred metres; below that the
pressure became too much for them and their plates gave and leaked.
When they leaked the salt water was apt to affect the accumulators
and chlorine gas was released to torment and suffocate the crews.
Below a hundred and fifty metres these fragile contrivances
crumpled up altogether and were destroyed.  The air in them became
foul when they submerged, in spite of the compressed oxygen they
carried, and the continual condensation of exhaled moisture gave
them a peculiar clammy discomfort.  They could move about under
water for a couple of days by means of their electric batteries,
but then it was necessary to come to the surface and run their oil
combustion engines for some hours to recharge.  Armed with guns and
packed with mines, bombs, torpedoes and other explosives, they set
out to harass and destroy the surface shipping of the enemy.</p><p>It was a difficult and almost fantastically dangerous task.
Submerged, they were invisible, but also they were blind.  Near the
surface they could get a limited view of what was going on by means
of a periscope.  On the surface they had the range of outlook of
any other surface boat, but at all the risks a surface boat must
take.  So under conditions of extreme discomfort and partial
asphyxiation the crews of these strangely formidable and strangely
fragile contrivances groped their way towards their victims.  To
see the quarry fairly they had to come to the surface, and that
exposed them to gunfire.  If their thin steel skins were pierced by
a single shot they could no longer go under.  Often when submerged
they betrayed their whereabouts unwittingly by bubbles of gas and
escapes of oil.</p><p>At first, in spite of their limitations, the submarines proved a
very deadly weapon, more particularly in the hands of the Central
European Powers.  They destroyed a great multitude of ships and
drowned many score thousands of men.  Then slowly the methods used
against them improved.  They were hunted by a special flotilla, and
among other ships by the "Q" boats, armed vessels disguised as
harmless merchantmen.  These lured them to the surface and then let
down sham bulwarks and opened fire upon them, so that after a time
they no longer dared emerge to challenge even the most harmless–
looking craft.  Explosive mines were moored in their possible
tracks and mine–armed nets set across harbours and channels.  They
were also watched for by aeroplanes and special airships whose
signals guided the destroyers to their quarry.  Ingenious listening
contrivances were invented to locate them.  They were shot at on
the surface, rammed, and pursued by "depth charges" which could
strain their plates and disable them even when exploded scores of
metres away.</p><p>Such, briefly, were the conditions of submarine warfare in the
years 1917–18.  And yet to the very end of the war men could be
found to carry it on, to destroy and drown and be in their turn
hunted and destroyed.  The building and launching of submersibles
never ceased.  Men went down in them to chilly confinement, to the
perpetual anxiety of mine or ram, to the quivering menace of the
distant depth charge, to the reasonable probability of a frightful
death beyond all human aid.  Few submarines returned to harbour ten
times; many went out new upon their first voyage never to return.
Two hundred of them were lost by the Germans alone; each loss a
tragedy of anguish and dismay in the deeps.  Towards the end it was
claimed by their antagonists that the crews were losing morale.
Once or twice an undamaged submarine that had been cornered
surrendered, and the new commanders showed a growing tendency to
return to port for minor repairs or other slight pretexts.  But on
the whole, such is the unimaginative heroic submissiveness of our
species, the service was sustained.  The Germans supplied most of
the flesh for this particular altar; willing and disciplined, their
youngsters saluted and carried their kit down the ladder into this
gently swaying clumsy murder mechanism which was destined to become
their coffin.</p><p>Their obedience brings us to one of the most fundamental lessons
that the Great War has for us: the extreme slowness with which the
realization of even the most obvious new conditions pierces through
the swathings of habitual acceptance.  Millions of human beings
went open–eyed to servitude, bullying, hardship, suffering and
slaughter, without a murmur, with a sort of fatalistic pride.  In
obedience to the dictates of the blindest prejudices and the most
fatuous loyalties they did their utmost to kill men against whom
they had no conceivable grievance, and they were in their turn
butchered gallantly, fighting to the last.  The War Pictures
volumes dismay our imaginations by portraying a series of wholesale
butcheries, many of them on a stupendous scale, of men who died
facing their enemies.  After the great slaughter of the French at
the outset of the war, and a mighty killing of Russians at the
Battles of Tannenberg and the Masurian Lakes, there was during what
was called the deadlock period, the period of trench warfare, a
diminution of the losses upon the West.  Hostilities sank down to a
gusty conflict of shell–fire, rifle assassinations, and raids with
bombs and bludgeons.  In the East, however, the Russians ran out of
ammunition, and held their trenches only by a great martyrdom of
men; they lost well over a million before the end of 1914, and yet
they continued to obey orders.  A series of minor campaigns broke
out in regions remote from the main centres of contact.  There is a
horrible account in the Pictures of the sufferings of some
thousands of British common soldiers taken prisoners at Kut, in
Mesopotamia.  (Their generals and other officers, however, who had
arranged that particular capitulation, were honourably and
comfortably entertained by their captors the Turks.)  There is no
effective expression of resentment by the British troops on record.</p><p>In 1916 and 1917 there were spasmodic renewals of hostilities on a
large scale by the British and French in France.  Newly trained
British armies were made to advance in close formation by generals
who, unless they were imbeciles, could have had no doubts of the
fate to which they were sending their men.  If they were not
imbeciles then they were criminally unwilling to learn and soul–
blind to suffering and waste.  The mentality of these men is still
a matter for discussion.  The poor boys they commanded were marched
forward shoulder to shoulder in successive waves of attack, and so
advancing they were shot to pieces by the enemy machine–guns.  Out
of battalions of six or seven hundred, perhaps a hundred would
struggle through the defensive fire and come to bomb–throwing,
bayonet–thrusts and surrender in the German trenches.  Small
isolated groups of them in shell–holes and captured positions
fought on for days.  So perished the flower of an entire school
generation, collected from hundreds of thousands of homes, more or
less loved, more or less cared for and more or less educated; it
had been enlisted, trained, sent out to the battlefields at
enormous cost, to be left at last in the desolated spaces between
the armies, lying in heaps and swathes to rot and be rat–eaten.
For months afterwards, as the photographs show, thousands of them
were to be seen sprawling in formation as they fell, just as if
their ranks were still waiting to leap again to the attack.  But as
the observer drew nearer he realized their corruption.  He
discovered bony hands, eyeless sockets, faces far gone in decay.</p><p>The British commander–in–chief in his despatches did not fail to
extol the courage of his lost battalions and to represent this
monstrous exploit as a victory.  Some mile or so of ground had been
gained in that July offensive and less than 12,000 prisoners had
been taken.  Twice as many British were left prisoners in German
hands, but this the despatches ignored.</p><p>The appalling nature of this particular disaster leaked out only
very slowly.  The British censorship at least was efficient and the
generals, however incapable in other respects, lied magnificently.
The Channel crossing made it particularly easy to hide events from
the British public.  And it had a peculiar effect on the British
troops; it gave them a feeling of being in another and a different
world from "home", a war–world in which such cruel and fantastic
things could be natural.  This monstrous massacre was, indeed,
contrived and carried through, not simply without a revolt, but
with scarcely an audible protest on the part of either the parents,
relations, friends or surviving comrades of those hosts of wasted
victims.</p><p>The commanders of the Russian armies in Austria, Armenia and
elsewhere were announcing equally costly and heroic triumphs and
the Germans and Austrians were issuing the most valiant and
excessive contradictions of their claims.  They, too, were losing
hideously enough, though in a lesser proportion than their
opponents.  The next year (1917), the British, gallant and docile
as ever, with only very slightly improved tactics, were going again
into great offensives.</p><p>But now the French troops began to manifest a livelier intelligence.
They were amidst familiar things, nearer their homes and less cut
off from subversive influences than the British.  A certain General
Nivelle, at that time French Commander–in–Chief, made what Churchill
calls an "experiment", which resulted altogether in the loss of
nearly a couple of hundred thousand men. It involved the advance of
masses of infantry into intense fields of fire.  In an hour, said
Lieutenant Ybarnegaray (in a debate in the French Chamber, June
1917), they were reduced to a crowd "running like madmen", all
formations and distinctions lost. Provision had been made for less
than 15,000 wounded.  There were seven times as many.  Most of the
casualties never received the most elementary attention for three
days.  The result was gangrene, amputation and death for thousands.
Then came the first intimation that there were limits to human
obedience.  A French division ordered into action to continue this
futile holocaust refused to march.  Churchill says this was "deeply
disquieting" to the authorities, and no doubt it pained and
distressed every intelligent amateur of war.  This particular
division was cajoled into a change of mind.  It took part in the
fighting, says Churchill, "without discredit", but the spirit of
its resistance spread.</p><p>The next sign of sanity in this world torture was the collapse of
the grotesque Russian autocracy.  We have already told of the
mental and moral decay of the Tzardom in our general study of the
degeneration of monarchy.  [Non inventus.—ED.]  Abruptly this
profoundly rotten government collapsed into nothing; its vast
domains became a various disorder, and for some months phantom
imitations of Western revolutionaries, inspired by memories of the
first French revolution or by legends of British parliamentary
wisdom, occupied the capital.  The one certain fact in the
situation was the accumulated disinclination of the Russian people
for any further warfare.  But this first republican government
under an eloquent lawyer politician, of no great directive force,
Alexandre Kerensky, was unable either to carry on the war or to end
it.  A subdued but spreading clamour for "peace by negotiation" in
all the combatant countries ensued, a clamour that active
repression and the most rigorous concealment in the Press failed to
silence.  There was an attempt to call a sort of peace conference
of Radicals at Stockholm, and then a second revolution in Russia
which carried a small and resolute Communist organization to power—
carried it to power simply and solely because there was no other
organized alternative, and because it promised peace plainly and
surely—peace on any terms.  The Russian armies melted away at its
signal; the men streamed home.  The German military authorities in
the East found the trenches before them undefended, and with every
courtesy of war, as one soldier to another, welcomed the Russian
officers of the old régime, taking refuge from the belated
resentment of their own men.</p><p>In 1917 mankind seemed already to be awakening from the war–
nightmare.  Mutinies broke out in sixteen separate French army
corps, 115 regiments were involved, divisions elected soldiers'
councils and whole regiments set out for Paris to demand a
reasonable wind–up of the struggle.  The one last hope of the
despairing soldiers, said Pierre Laval, had been Stockholm.  That
disappointment had made life unbearable.  But the storm abated with
the entry of the United States of America into the war, and the
powers in control of the Western World were still able to pursue
their dreadful obsessions for another year.</p><p>War Pictures for Posterity by Pen, Pencil and Camera devotes a
whole volume (xxi) to the tragedy of a special Russian infantry
corps in France.  Fifteen thousand Russians had been sent thither
in 1916 to be equipped and armed and put into the line with the
French armies.  Many of these poor lads scarcely knew the
difference between a Frenchman and a German, and the ostensible
objects of the war were quite beyond their understanding.  But they
heard of the revolution in their own country and they resolved to
consider their attitude with regard to it.  They elected
representatives and put it to the vote whether they should continue
to fight, which meant for them to take part in that "experiment" of
Nivelle's known to be in preparation at the time.  They chose what
seemed to them the generous part and went into the battle.  The
French command used them ruthlessly, and nearly 6,000 were killed
or wounded.  The rest came out of the line and mutinied.  They
would fight no more.  Thereupon these defenceless men were
surrounded by trustworthy French troops, a great concentration of
guns was assembled, fire was opened upon them suddenly and they
were massacred.  Horrible photographs of the details of this—
photographs hidden away at the time from the authorities and
brought to light later—are given in the summary already cited.</p><p>For nearly a year the French lost confidence in the morale of their
own men and dared make no more great attacks, but their allies
offered up another 400,000 men in the battle of Paschendaele and
accounted for 300,000 Germans, and in the spring the Germans made a
vast multitudinous attack in the West which succeeded at first and
then collapsed, whereupon their antagonists, reinforced by new
armies from America, waded back through blood to a dreadful final
victory.  The last nine months of the conflict saw more slaughter
than any preceding year.  From March 21st, 1918, to November 11th
in the same year the British suffered 830,000 casualties, the
French and Belgians 964,000 and the Germans 1,470,000.  There were
also 2,000,000 American troops brought to Europe before the end,
and of these more than half were actually engaged in the fighting.
Their casualties were certainly not less than 350,000.  Portuguese
and other contingents from the most unexpected quarters also
contributed to that culminating death–roll, but it is impossible
for us now to give exact numbers for these minor forces.</p><p>These are the gross figures of warfare.  But War Pictures devotes
three volumes, perhaps the most horrible of all, to the
presentation of various details of the fighting in which these vast
multitudes suffered and perished.  These three volumes are like the
microscopic slides in a specimen book of anatomy, which show us
from a selected scrap of tissue the texture of the whole.  Little
figures stand out enlarged, chosen by the hazard that they wrote or
talked or carried a camera, to represent the nameless millions who
have left no record.  We have accounts of men who were left to lie
out for days between the lines, tortured by thirst and stifled by
the stench of their own corruption, and yet who survived to tell
the tale.  We have the stories of men who fell into heaps of
rotting dead, and lay there choking, and of men who were gassed.
The tortures of gas were already many and various, and most of the
mixtures then used left tormenting weaknesses in the system for the
rest of life.  We have descriptions of the rude surgery of the time
and abstracts of the mental disorders through which minds fled from
reality.  There are also some dreadful pictures of mutilated men,
faceless, crippled, grotesquely distorted, and an autobiography of
one of the blinded (Outstaying My Welcome, by Fritz Schiff, 1923).
Scores of thousands of unhappy fragments of humanity had to be
hidden away in special institutions until they died, they were at
once so terrifying and so pitiful and hopeless.  The world forgot
them even while they lived.</p><p>The distortion of souls was even more dreadful than the distortion
of bodies.  One of the most lurid items in that dreadful assemblage
of realities is a lecture on the use of the bayonet, which chanced
to be printed, reprinted later by anti–war propagandists and so
preserved for us, delivered by a certain Sergeant–Major Franklin to
some English cadets in London.  To us he is incredible in his
ferocity; we are almost forced to believe he was drunk or mad,
until we realize from the "laughter" that punctuated his
utterances, from the hearty thanks of his commanding officer, and
the "three cheers" which rewarded him at the conclusion of his
discourse, that he was merely expressing the spirit of war service
as it was then understood.</p><p>"If you see a wounded German," he said, "shove him out and have no
nonsense about it."</p><p>He was all against taking prisoners—and for murdering them after
surrender.  He told with sympathy and approval of how a corporal
under him butchered a group of German boys.  "Can I do these blokes
in, sir?" asked the corporal, pointing to a bunch of disarmed
enemies.</p><p>"Please yourself," said the sergeant–major….</p><p>When they had been "done in", the honest corporal, a released
convict from Dartmoor prison, came back to the sergeant–major very
gratified and honoured, and, still in favour, discussed the
technical difficulties of withdrawing a bayonet quickly in order to
be ready for the "next fellow".</p><p>That was, that is, the spirit to which war brings a human being.
Sergeant–Major Franklin had his abundant equivalents in every army
engaged.  We are able to quote an English document, freely
published.  Participants in many other countries had less freedom.
On the whole the English were as gentle as any other soldiers.  But
fear and bloodlust, it is plain, wipe out all the slowly acquired
restraints and tolerance of social order very quickly and
completely from any breed of men.  History must not be written in
pink and gilt.  Prisoners and wounded were not simply neglected and
ill–treated and "shoved out".  Many were actually tortured to
death—either by way of reprisals or in sheer wanton cruelty.
There is also a series of photographs of foully mutilated bodies,
mutilated and indecently displayed while they were dying or
immediately after they were dead.  Those millions marched indeed
right out of civilization, right out of any sort of human life as
we know it to–day, marched down to something viler than mere
bestiality, when they marched into the war zone.</p><p>After the summer of 1918, which brought with it the certainty of
ultimate defeat, the combatant energy of Germany evaporated.
Everywhere there was distress and hunger due to a rigorous
blockade.  The discipline of the land relaxed; the country behind
the front was infested by stragglers; the Higher German Command
found itself now, like its antagonists, unable to rely upon the men
to advance, found itself unable to rely upon their resistance to an
enemy attack.  They became eager to surrender—taking the off–
chance of meeting experimental corporals from Dartmoor on the way.</p><p>Wherever there was still loyalty and obedience, however, men were
still callously sacrificed by the Higher Command.  War Pictures
(vol. xxvii, 23842 et seq,) show the German machine–gunners in
their pits, on the defensive against advancing British and American
troops.  These men allowed themselves to be drugged and chained to
their weapons, and so continued to fire and kill until the attack
came up to them.  Then they found small mercy.  They were bayoneted
or their brains were beaten out.  They paid for the inventions
of their masters.  They paid for the hatred of Germany the
introduction of poison gas had evoked in every attacking army.
Such residues of senseless devotion availed nothing against the
massive pressures that were at last exhausting Germany.  In
November the Kaiser, the War Lord, was in flight; a humiliating
Armistice had been concluded and the German armies were streaming
home in disorder, incoherently revolutionary.</p><p>Upon that phrase, "incoherently revolutionary", our account of the
main war may very well end.  Here we will only allude to the defeat
and demoralization of the Italian armies after the battle of
Caporetto, when 800,000 were either killed, wounded, taken
prisoner, or (sensible fellows) "went home".  Nor will we describe
the naval battles, of which the chief and last was Jutland.  It was
the last, because afterwards the German admirals were faced by the
threat of mutiny if they essayed another fight.  Whether it was or
was not a victory for the British was never exactly determined.
The controversy died out during the Polish wars.</p><p>The War Pictures volumes give many photographs and accounts of
these naval encounters.  We have, for example, a whole series of
snapshots of a British cruiser in the Battle of Jutland, the
Defence steaming at full–speed–ahead to attack and finish up a
smashed and sinking German battleship, the Wiesbaden.  The onrush
of that fierce mechanism is terrific.  It seems invincible and
overpowering.  It has an undeniable splendour.  Then suddenly a
series of blinding flashes show the Defence has been hit by the
fire of some other German battleship coming to the help of her
sister ship, and in a moment she has blown up and gone; she is no
more than a mounting unfolding column of smoke and flying
fragments, including, we realize with an effort, the torn and
scalded bodies of eight hundred men.  Then a welter of littered
tumbled water….</p><p>There is no end to the multitude of such pictures.</p><p>But let us return to our phrase "incoherently revolutionary".  That
is the key to the whole human situation at that time.  The distaste
for the war throughout the world was enormous, if not in its
opening phases, then certainly before the second year was reached.
It bored; it disgusted.  Its events had none of the smashing
decisiveness that seizes the imagination.  Even the great naval
battle of Jutland was, from the point of view of spectacle, a
complete failure.  None the less, for a very simple reason a
comparatively small minority of resolutely belligerent persons was
able to keep this vast misery going.  On the one hand the war was
in accordance with the ruling ideas of the time, while on the other
the hundreds of millions whose astonishment and dismay deepened
daily, as horror unfolded beyond horror, had no conception of any
alternative pattern of life to which they could turn as a refuge
from its relentless sequences.</p><p>To cry "End the war" ended nothing, because it gave no intimations
of what had to replace belligerent governments in the control of
human affairs.  The peace the masses craved for was as yet only a
featureless negative.  But peace must be a positive thing, designed
and sustained, for peace is less natural than warfare.  We who have
at last won through to the Pax Mundi know how strong and resolute,
how powerfully equipped and how vigilant, the keepers of the peace
must be.</p></section><footer/></body></html>