<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>13: 1933: "Progress" Comes to a Halt</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch01s12.xhtml" title="12: The Breakdown of &quot;Finance&quot; and Social Morale After Versailles"/><link rel="next" href="ch02.xhtml" title="Book the Second"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="13: 1933: &quot;Progress&quot; Comes to a Halt" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646602080"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">13: 1933: "Progress" Comes to a Halt</h2></div></div></div><p>So we bring the history of mankind to that great pause in social
expansion which concluded the first third of the twentieth century.
The year 1933 closed in a phase of dismayed apprehension.  It was
like that chilly stillness, that wordless interval of suspense,
that comes at times before the breaking of a storm.  The wheels of
economic life were turning only reluctantly and uncertainly; the
millions of unemployed accumulated and became more and more plainly
a challenge and a menace.  All over the world the masses were
sinking down through distress and insufficiency to actual famine.
And collectively they were doing nothing effectual in protest or
struggle.  Insurrectionary socialism lurked and muttered in every
great agglomeration.  But insurrection alone could remedy nothing
without constructive ideas, and there was no power and energy yet
behind any such constructive ideas as had appeared.  The merely
repressive forces, whatever their feebleness in the face of
criminality, were still fully capable of restraining popular
insurrection.  They could keep misery stagnant and inoperative.</p><p>Everywhere, in everything, there was an ebb of vitality.  A decline
in the public health was becoming perceptible.  A diminishing
resistance to infections and a rise in the infantile death–rate was
already very evident in the vital statistics after 1933.</p><p>War was manifestly drawing nearer, in Eastern Asia, in Eastern
Europe; it loitered, it advanced, it halted, and no one displayed
the vigour or capacity needed to avert its intermittent, unhurrying
approach.</p><p>Still the immense inertias of the old order carried things on.
Under a darkling sky, the majority of people were going about their
business according to use and wont.  The unprofitable industries
still carried on with reduced staffs; the shopkeepers opened their
shops to a dwindling tale of customers; the unemployed queued up at
the Labour Exchanges by force of habit, and some at least got a
job; the landlord's agent no longer collected the rent that was due
but called for an instalment of his arrears; the unfed or ill–fed
children went sniffing to chilly schools to be taught by dispirited
teachers on reduced salaries, but still the schools were not
closed; the bankrupt railways and steamship lines ran diminished
but punctual services; hotels stayed open not to make profits but
to mitigate losses; the road traffic lost something of its newness
and smartness and swiftness, but still it flowed; the crowds in the
streets moved less briskly, but, if anything, these sluggish crowds
were more numerous, and the police, if less alertly vigilant,
maintained order.</p><p>There had been a considerable if inadequate building boom after the
Peace of Versailles, but after 1930 new construction fell off more
and more.  Yet some builders found work, necessary repairs were
attended to, burnt–out houses were reconditioned, for example.  In
1935 and 1937 the world was swept by influenza epidemics of unusual
virulence.  The lowered resistance, already noted by the
statisticians, was now made conspicuous by this return towards
mediæval conditions; but the doctors and nurses stuck to their
duties stoutly and the druggists and undertakers, whose affairs had
long since been reorganized on Big Business lines, profited.</p><p>Pictures of life in the shadows during this phase of devitalization
are not very abundant, nor do they convey the essential misery into
which a whole generation was born, in which it lived and died.  One
sees the rows of dilapidated houses, the wretched interiors and
shabbily clad men and women standing about.  In these pictures they
seem always to be just standing about.  Descriptive journalism
brings the student nearer to the realities of a life without space,
colour, movement, hope or opportunity.  There were a number of
"enquiries" made, more particularly by the British, American and
French newspapers, and the tale they tell is always a tale of
wheels slowing down to a stoppage, of factory gates being closed,
of smokeless chimneys and rusting rails.  Here is a vivid
contemporary vignette, to show how things were with millions of
human beings during this strange phase of human experience.  It is
from the pen of H. M. Tomlinson (1873–1969) one of the best of
English descriptive writers.</p><p>"I chanced upon a little town above Cardiff last week.  It was by
pure chance; I had never before heard of the place.  It is typical
of these valleys, so never mind its name.  It could have many
names.  Its population is, or was, about 6,000.  Its people have
faced trouble before—less than twenty years ago over 300 of its
men perished in a mine explosion.  We won't say the town got over
that, for I spoke to those for whom the calamity is an abiding
horror.  It was a terrific defeat for them in the war upon Nature,
but survivors returned to the struggle and said no more about it.</p><p>"When first I saw the town from a distance, with the bleak, bare
uplands about it, I was reminded of the towns, once familiar, that
were too near the battleline in France.  It was midday, and sunny,
yet this colliery town was silent and so still that it seemed under
a spell.</p><p>"As a fact it IS under a spell.  It is, in a way, dead.  But its
people cling to the empty shell of it.  Where else can they go?</p><p>"At first sight no people could have been there.  Buildings in the
foreground were in ruins.  The gaunt pit–head gearing evidently had
not moved for an age.  The gaps in the blackened walls of the
power–house suggested a home of bats and owls.</p><p>"The first man I met when I reached the end of its main street and
saw then that the shops were not only closed, but abandoned, was
standing on the kerb, a man in the middle years, shrewd, but
haggard, his clothes brushed till they were threadbare.</p><p>"'What's the matter with this town?' I asked.</p><p>"'On the dole.'</p><p>"'Are you out too?'</p><p>"'Of course I'm out.'</p><p>"'How long?'</p><p>"He was silent.  He held up five fingers.</p><p>"'Months?'</p><p>"'Years.'</p><p>"'Are all the men here the same?'</p><p>"'Most of them.  And won't go back.'</p><p>"He led me up a mound of refuse, where a goat was eating paper, and
we had a near view of the colliery itself.  'That's the reason we
won't go down again,' he said.  'How would you work it?'</p><p>"Whether by design or rust a steel footbridge had fallen across the
wide railway track which went to the pit–head.  A deflected stream
guttered down between the metals, which were overgrown with grass
and stagnant marsh stuff.  The outbuildings were a huddle of
dilapidations.  It looked haunted.  'Some men I knew,' muttered my
guide, 'are still down there.  There they'll stop.  They've been
there nineteen years now.  Would you call them lucky?'</p><p>"Two thousand five hundred men came out of the principal colliery
five years ago.  That is why the shops are shut, long rows of them
with whitewashed windows and doorways filled with dust and straws.
The woodwork of many houses has been taken for firewood.  Even the
Cooperative store is shut, as well as the pawnshop.  Thrift and
thriftlessness mean the same thing in this town, where I noticed
that even Nonconformist chapels, with broken windows, had been left
to the rats and birds.</p><p>"Worse than the dismal shops and broken buildings are the groups of
shabby men, all neat and tidy, standing listless and silent at the
street corners, waiting.</p><p>"Waiting for what?  Nothing.  There is nothing to come….</p><p>"They are doomed, these parents, to watch a generation grow up with
thin bones and a shadow on its mind.  Their children learn the
signs of the slow death about them when they should be at play;
children that have no childhood.</p><p>"Their homes are in a graveyard of human aspiration…."</p><p>The Press and literature of that period make curious reading.  It
varied between a bleak insincere optimism and hopeless desperation.
An undignified viciousness and a jeering humour invaded popular art
and literature; "strong" in manner and in flavour rather than in
any grasp upon the realities of contemporary life.  There was also
an abundant production and consumption of reassuring and
deliberately "cheerful" books, a movement towards religious
mysticism and other–worldliness and a marked tendency towards
repressive puritanism.  Excesses of libertinism provoke censorious
and superstitious suppression; the two things are correlated
aspects of a decline in human dignity.  In the face of its
financial and political perplexities mankind was becoming
neurasthenic.</p><p>All neurasthenia has apparently unaccountable elements.  To us to–
day, it seems incredible that the way out of all these distresses
was not plainly seen and boldly taken.  There was a blindness and
an effortlessness that still exercise the mind of the social
psychologist.  The way was so plain that it was visible, it was
indicated by hundreds of intelligent and detached observers as
early as the thirties of the twentieth century.  Maxwell Brown, in
his study of the Modern State idea, has two supplementary volumes
of citations to this effect.  Such phrases, for example, as
"Cosmopolis, Inflation and Public Employment" (from a British
provincial newspaper article in 1932) do state, in general terms at
any rate, the line of escape for the race.  These are crude, ill–
defined terms, but manifestly they have in them the shape of the
ultimate reconstruction.  "Cosmopolis" foreshadows our rational
world controls, "Inflation" was a plain indication of our present
complete restraint upon the aggravation of debts and fluctuations
of price level; "Public Employment" was our ancestors' conception
of socialist enterprise.</p><p>But before the exodus to peace and freedom could be achieved, such
scattered flashes of understanding had to ignite a steadier
illumination.  The conception of revolutionary world reconstruction
had to spread from the few to the many, spread to them not merely
as an idea and as a suggestion, but in such force as to saturate
their minds and determine their lives.  Then, and then only, could
the necessary will–power be marshalled and directed to the
effective reorganization of earthly affairs.</p><p>A struggle for sanity had to take place in the racial brain, a
great casting–out of false assumptions, conventional distortions,
hitherto uncriticized maxims and impossible "rights," a great
clearing–up of ideas about moral, material and biological
relationships; it was a struggle that, as we shall see, involved
the passing of three generations.  To an analysis of the factors
and decisive forces in this struggle our history must next address
itself.</p><p>Something between eight and ten thousand million human lives in all
were lived out during the Age of Frustration.  Compared with the
average lives of to–day, they were shorter and far less healthy;
nearly all of them had long phases of such infection, maladjustment
and enfeeblement as are now almost outside man's experience.  The
great majority of them were passed laboriously in squalid or dingy
surroundings, in huts, hovels, cottages, tenements and cellars
almost as dismal as the ancestral cave and nearly as insanitary.  A
minority who could command the services of "domestics" lived in
relative comfort and even with a certain freedom and luxury, at an
enormous cost to the rest.  This prosperous minority dwindled after
1931.  It had vanished in Russia after 1917.</p><p>There was a diminishing sense of personal security in the world, an
enervating fear and uncertainty about the morrow, through the
ensuing years.  There was what we find now an almost incredible
amount of mutual distrust, suspicion, irritation and quarrelling.
Only a small proportion of the world's population lived to be
peacefully and gracefully old in this phase of deterioration.
Disease or a violent death became the common end again.  One of the
first general histories that was ever written was called The
Martyrdom of Man (Winwood Reade, 1871).  In the Age of Frustration
it seemed to many that that martyrdom was mounting to a final
hopeless agony.</p><p>Yet in the welter there were also laughter, sympathy, helpfulness
and courage.  Those fretted and painful lives interwove with
threads of great brightness.  Out of that medley of human
distresses, out of the brains of men stressed out of indolence and
complacency by the gathering darkness and suffering about them,
there came first the hope, then the broad plan and the effort, and
at last the achievement of that fruitful order, gathering beauty
and happy assurance, in which we live to–day.</p></section><footer/></body></html>