<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>3: The Accumulating Disproportions of the Old Order</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch01s02.xhtml" title="2: How the Idea and Hope of the Modern World State First Appeared"/><link rel="next" href="ch01s04.xhtml" title="4: Early Attempts to Understand and Deal With These Disproportions; the Criticisms of Karl Marx and Henry George"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="3: The Accumulating Disproportions of the Old Order" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646454400"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">3: The Accumulating Disproportions of the Old Order</h2></div></div></div><p>Let us consider some of the main appearances that disposed many
minds to expect a world community in the early twentieth century.
In the first place a very considerable financial unity had been
achieved.  The credit of the City of London ran to the ends of the
earth and the gold sovereign was for all practical purposes a world
coin, exchangeable locally for local expenditure within relatively
slight fluctuations.  Economic life was becoming very generalized.
Over great areas trade moved with but small impediments, and the
British still hoped to see their cosmopolitan conception of Free
Trade accepted by the whole world.  The International Institute of
Agriculture in Rome was developing an annual census of staple
production and reaching out towards a world control of commodity
transport.  Considerable movements and readjustments of population
were going on, unimpeded by any government interference.  Swarms of
Russian Poles, for instance, drifted into Eastern Germany for the
harvest work and returned; hundreds of thousands of Italians went
to work in the United States for a few years and then came back
with their earnings to their native villages.  An ordinary
traveller might go all over the more settled parts of the earth and
never be asked for a passport unless he wanted to obtain a
registered letter at a post office or otherwise prove his identity.</p><p>A number of minor but significant federal services had also come
into existence and had a sound legal standing throughout the world,
the Postal Union for example.  Before 1914 C.E. a written document
was delivered into the hands of the addressee at almost every point
upon the planet, almost as surely as, if less swiftly than, it is
to–day.  (The Historical Documents Board has recently reprinted a
small book, International Government, prepared for the little old
Fabian Society during the Great War period by L. S. Woolf, which
gives a summary of such arrangements.  He lists twenty–three
important world unions dealing at that time with trade, industry,
finance, communications, health, science, art, literature, drugs,
brothels, criminals, emigration and immigration and minor political
affairs.)  These world–wide cooperations seemed—more particularly
to the English–speaking peoples—to presage a direct and
comparatively smooth transition from the political patchwork of the
nineteenth century, as the divisions of the patchwork grew
insensibly fainter, to a stable confederation of mankind.  The idea
of a coming World–State was quite familiar at the time—one finds
it, for instance, as early as Lord Tennyson's Locksley Hall
(published in 1842); but there was no effort whatever to achieve
it, and indeed no sense of the need of such effort.  The World–
State was expected to come about automatically by the inherent
forces in things.</p><p>That belief in some underlying benevolence in uncontrolled events
was a common error, one might almost say THE common error, of the
time.  It affected every school of thought.  In exactly the same
fashion the followers of Marx (before the invigorating advent of
Lenin and the Bolshevist reconstruction of Communism) regarded
their dream of world communism as inevitable, and the disciples
of Herbert Spencer found a benevolent Providence in "free
competition".  "Trust Evolution", said the extreme Socialist and
the extreme Individualist, as piously as the Christians put their
trust in God.  It was the Bolshevik movement in the twentieth
century which put will into Communism.  The thought of the
nineteenth century revolutionary and reactionary alike was
saturated with that confident irresponsible laziness.  As Professor
K. Chandra Sen has remarked, hope in the Victorian period was not a
stimulant but an opiate.</p><p>We who live in a disciplined order, the chastened victors of a
hard–fought battle, understand how superficial and unsubstantial
were all those hopeful appearances.  The great processes of
mechanical invention, which have been described in our general
account of the release of experimental science from deductive
intellectualism, were increasing the power and range of every
operating material force quite irrespective of its fitness or
unfitness for the new occasions of mankind.  With an equal
impartiality they were bringing world–wide understanding and world–
wide massacre into the range of human possibility.</p><p>It was through no fault of these inventors and investigators that
the new opportunities they created were misused.  That was outside
their range.  They had as yet no common culture of their own.  Nor,
since each worked in his own field, were they responsible for the
fragmentary irregularity of their discoveries.  Biological and
especially social invention were lagging far behind the practical
advances of the exacter, simpler sciences.  Their application was
more difficult; the matters they affected were so much more deeply
embedded in ordinary use and wont, variation was more intimate,
novelties could not be inserted with the same freedom.  It was easy
to supplant the coach and horses on the macadamized road by the
steam–engine or the railway, because it was not necessary to do
anything to the road or the coach and horses to bring about the
change.  They were just left alone to run themselves out as the
railroad (and later the automobile on the rubber–glass track)
superseded them.  But men cannot set up new social institutions,
new social and political and industrial relationships, side by side
with the old in that fashion.  It must be an altogether tougher and
slower job.  It is a question not of ousting but of reconstruction.
The old must be converted into the new without ceasing for a moment
to be a going concern.  The over–running of the biologically old by
the mechanically new, due to these differences in timing, was
inevitable, and it reached its maximum in the twentieth century.</p><p>A pathological analogy may be useful here.  In the past, before the
correlation of development in living organisms began to be studied,
people used to suffer helplessly and often very dreadfully from all
sorts of irregularities of growth in their bodies.  The medical
services of the time, such as they were, were quite unable to
control them.  One of these, due to what is called the Nurmi ratios
in the blood, was a great overproduction of bone, either locally or
generally.  The suffered gradually underwent distortion into a
clumsy caricature of his former self; his features became coarse
and massive, his skull bones underwent a monstrous expansion; the
proportions of his limbs altered, and the leverage of his muscles
went askew.  He was made to look grotesque; he was crippled and at
last killed.  Something strictly parallel happened to human society
in the hundred years before the Great War.  Under the stimulus of
mechanical invention and experimental physics it achieved, to
pursue our metaphor, a hypertrophy of bone, muscle and stomach,
without any corresponding enlargement of its nervous controls.</p><p>Long before the Great War this progressive disproportion had been
dimly recognized by many observers.  The favourite formula was to
declare that "spiritual"—for the naïve primordial opposition of
spirit and matter was still accepted in those days—had not kept
pace with "material" advance.  This was usually said with an air of
moral superiority to the world at large.  Mostly there was a vague
implication that if these other people would only refrain from
using modern inventions so briskly, or go to church more, or marry
earlier and artlessly, or read a more "spiritual" type of
literature, or refrain from mixed bathing, or work harder and
accept lower wages, or be more respectful and obedient to
constituted authority, all might yet be well.  Beyond this sort of
thing there was little recognition of the great and increasing
disharmonies of the social corpus until after the Great War.</p><p>The young reader will ask, "But where was the Central Observation
Bureau?  Where was the professorial and student body which should
have been recording these irregularities and producing plans for
adjustment?"</p><p>There was no Central Observation Bureau.  That did not exist for
another century.  That complex organization of discussion,
calculation, criticism and forecast was undreamt of.  Those cities
of thought, full of serene activities, came into existence only
after the organization of the Record and Library Network under the
Air Dictatorship between 2010 and 2030.  Even the mother thought–
city, the World Encyclopædia Establishment, was not founded until
2012.  In the early twentieth century there was still no adequate
estimate of economic forces and their social reactions.  There were
only a few score professors and amateurs of these fundamentally
important studies scattered throughout the earth.  They were
scattered in every sense; even their communications were
unsystematic.  They had no powers of enquiry, no adequate
statistics, little prestige; few people heeded what they thought or
said.</p><p>Maybe they deserved nothing better.  They bickered stupidly with
and discredited each other.  They ignored or wilfully misunderstood
each other.  It is impossible to read such social and economic
literature as the period produced without realizing the
extraordinary backwardness of that side of the world's intellectual
life.  It is difficult to believe nowadays that the writers of
these publications, at once tediously copious and incredibly
jejune, were living at the same time as the lively multitude of
workers in the experimental sciences which were daily adding to and
reshaping knowledge to achieve fresh practical triumphs.  From 1812
C.E., when public gas–lighting was first organized, to the outbreak
of the Great War, while the world was being made over anew by gas,
by steam, by oil, and then by the swift headlong development of
electrical science, while the last terræ incognitæ were being
explored and mapped, while a multitude of hitherto unthought–of
elements and compounds and hundreds of thousands of new substances
were coming into use, while epidemic diseases were being restrained
and driven back, while the death rate was being halved, and the
average duration of life increased by a score of years, the social
and political sciences remained practically stagnant and
unserviceable.  Throughout that century of material achievement
there is no single instance of the successful application of a
social, economic or educational generalization.</p><p>Because of this belatedness of the social sciences, the progressive
dislocation of the refined if socially limited and precarious
civilization of the more advanced of the eighteenth and nineteenth
century sovereign states went on without any effectual contemporary
understanding of what was straining it to pieces.  The Europeans
and the Americans of the early twentieth century apprehended the
social and political forces that ravaged their lives hardly more
clearly than the citizens of the Roman Empire during its collapse.
Plenty and the appearance of security HAPPENED; then débâcle
HAPPENED.  There was no analysis of operating causes.  For years
even quite bold and advanced thinkers were chased by events.  They
did not grasp what was occurring at the time.  They only realized
what had really occurred long afterwards.  And so they never
foresaw.  There was no foresight, and therefore still less could
there be any understanding control.</p></section><footer/></body></html>