<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>5: The Fading Vision of a World Pax: Japan Reverts to Warfare</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch02s04.xhtml" title="4: Changes in War Practice After the World War"/><link rel="next" href="ch02s06.xhtml" title="6: The Western Grip on Asia Relaxes"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="5: The Fading Vision of a World Pax: Japan Reverts to Warfare" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646707260"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">5: The Fading Vision of a World Pax: Japan Reverts to Warfare</h2></div></div></div><p>We have shown already how Parliamentary Democracy necessarily
abolished real leaders in public affairs and substituted a strange
type of pseudo–leader, men who were essentially RESULTANTS, who
made nothing, created no forces, met no emergencies, but simply
manoeuvred for position, prestige and the pettier rewards of power.
They followed the collapse of the decaying order without an effort
to arrest its decay.  Why indeed should they have made an effort?
They were representatives of the popular will, and if there was no
popular will …</p><p>We have already considered the behaviour of this amazingly
ineffective collection of men in face of the financial dislocation
that was choking the economic life of the race.  It is doubtful if
a single one of them ever gave a month's continuous study to the
plain realities of that situation.  And in the face of the
accumulating stresses created by the maladjustments of Versailles,
this galaxy of humbugs to whom democracy had entrusted the
direction of human beings—humbugs unavoidably, for the system
insisted upon it regardless of the best intentions—was equally
enigmatical and impotent.  Along the eastern frontiers of Italy and
Germany the open sores festered.  No one sought to heal them.  In
the Far East the conflict between Japan and China, failing a
European protest, became frankly a formal war.  Every world event
cried louder than the last for collective action, and there was no
collective action.  The League of Nations appointed commissions of
enquiry and produced often quite admirable analyses of hopeless
situations.</p><p>No one knew how to arrest the grim development of the situation.
The chief of states repeated the traditional gestures, as though
these were all that could be expected of them.  But the patterns of
history served them no more.  They found themselves like men who
attempt to gesticulate and find their limbs have changed to cloud
and rock.</p><p>Of all the "Powers" of that time the behaviour of Japan was the
most decisive.  In 1931 an internal revolution in that country had
put political power into the hands of a patriotic military group,
diplomatically unscrupulous and grossly sentimental according to
the distinctive Japanese tradition, and this coterie set itself now
with extraordinary energy and an equally extraordinary lack of
authentic vision to caricature the aggressive imperialisms of the
nineteenth–century Europeans.  The mind of this ruling group was
still intensely romantic, still obsessed by those ideas of national
dominance and glory which had passed already so fatally over the
intelligence of Christendom.  Their military initiatives were
quasi–Napoleonic, their diplomatic pretences and evasions modelled
on the best European precedents.  It was "Japan's turn" now.</p><p>The investigation of just what these Japanese Imperialists imagined
they were doing has greatly exercised our historical research
department.  But it is indeed only a special instance of the
general riddle of what any "Power", regarded as a mentality in
itself, imagined it was doing in that age.  Only a century and a
half has passed since those Japanese columns were marching into one
Chinese town after another, and today our psychologists confess
themselves baffled by an enterprise that was manifestly undertaken
by men like ourselves and yet had already assumed a quality of
absolute insanity.  Why did these very intelligent people behave in
that fashion?</p><p>The clue lies in the extraordinary ease with which distasteful
reality can be repressed by the human mind, and in the atmosphere
of grotesque but flattering illusions in which these people were
living.  Just as in the West the bankers, economic experts,
responsible statesmen would not realize the complete smash to which
their fiscal and financial methods were plainly heading until the
smash had actually come, so these Japanese militarists could not
see the inevitable consequences of their continental adventures.
They could not see behind them a miserable peasantry breeding
itself down to the basest subsistence; a miserable urban
proletariat deteriorating physically and morally; they could not
estimate the mutterings of revolt in all their sweated and driven
industrial centres; they could not understand the protests of their
own fine and growing intelligentzia.</p><p>Even the steady fall of the national credit abroad and the
increasing economic stresses of the land aroused no misgivings of
hallucination.  Japan in her headlong pursuit of Western precedents
was rapidly reproducing all the revolutionary conditions of the
West.  All that was lost upon her leaders.  The one thing they
could see clearly was that China was disorganized, that she was
struggling with great difficulty to discover a new method of
collective living to replace her ancient slack imperialism, and
that by all the rules of the international game this was Japan's
opportunity.  They thought that, in very much the same way that the
disorganization of the Empire of the Great Mogul had laid India
bare to the piratical enterprise of the Europeans and permitted the
establishment of the unstable aimless Indian Empire of the British,
so now Fate had invited them to an equally glorious opportunity, to
a parallel Japanese domination of the most or all of Asia.  Who
could tell where their imperial adventure would end—or whether it
would have an end?  The mirage of limitless power and glory opened
out before them, as it has opened out to all empire builders since
the world began.</p><p>They were reckoning without the New Warfare, reckoning without
modern industrialism, without the paradoxical self–destructiveness
of Private Capitalist enterprise, without Russia, without America,
without the superior mass, the traditional unity and mental
obduracy of the Chinese population.  They were thinking as a
Pomeranian Junker or a British general from that "hot–bed of
Imperialists", Ulster, might have thought before 1914.  It was an
archaic megalomania—that led to the killing of about three million
combatants, an extreme social disintegration in China, and the
final collapse of the Japanese monarchy.</p><p>In the special histories of this struggle, the student who needs or
desires the knowledge may find the detailed particulars of the
Japanese aggressions from 1931 onward which grew at last into the
formal invasion of China proper; the tentative of Shanghai, the
invasion of Manchuria and the establishment of the puppet kingdom
of Manchukuo (1932), the attack on Shanhaikwan which led to the
penetration of the Great Wall, the invasion of China Proper from
the north and the march on Pekin.  The operations up to that point
were largely on the pattern of the old warfare as it had been
practised up to 1914.  The Chinese were poorly equipped and had
little modern material; the Japanese found it unnecessary to make
any excessively expensive efforts to attain their objectives.</p><p>All this earlier fighting went on to an accompaniment of protests
from the quite powerless League of Nations at Geneva.  A "Lytton
Report" prepared by a commission of enquiry is to be found in the
Historical Documents Series (2067111).  But counterbalancing these
remonstrances were the ambiguous utterances of the British Foreign
Office, the support of the French armament industry and its Press,
the overt support of a great group of American banks and their
newspapers.  In view of these divisions, the Japanese militarists
had every reason to disregard Western criticism altogether.</p><p>In 1935 the Japanese occupied Pekin and Tientsin.  They set up a
second puppet monarchy in Pekin.  But they found very great
difficulty in holding the country, particularly to the south and
west of these centres.  Manchuria, Inner Mongolia and Shansi
remained seething with bandits and rebel bands, and the still
unoccupied valley of the Yang–tsze–kiang remained fighting with an
increasing unity under the leadership of the reorganized
Kuomintang.  In no part of China or Manchuria was it safe for a
Japanese to go about alone, and a rigorous economic boycott,
sustained by an omnipresent terrorism, continued.  The Kuomintang
was a directive association created by the great Chinese
revolutionary Sun Yat Sen, and it had gone through various
vicissitudes; it had a rough general resemblance to the Communist
Party and the various European fascisms, and, like them, it
sustained a core of conscious purpose throughout its community.  It
had no vital centre, no formal head; it was a thing of the mind,
unquenchable by military operations.  And under the stress of this
resistance it had become violently patriotic and xenophobic.</p><p>In 1936 Japan already had more than a million and a half men
scattered between the Manchurian frontier and Canton, where a third
landing had been made and still her hold upon China hardly extended
beyond the range of her guns and the glitter of her bayonets.  She
had bombed Nankin twice on an extensive scale, Pekin before its
surrender, and Wuchang and Hankow, with Yellow Cross bombs.
Hundreds of thousands of people had been slaughtered, but the great
invertebrate body of China seemed able to endure such losses with a
stoicism impossible in a more highly organized state.  In return
the "Vindication of China" Society astonished the world by suddenly
bombing and, through an error in the gas mixture, STERILIZING Osaka
and Tokio.</p><p>No one knew of these Chinese air forces until they appeared in
action.  The machines had come from Sweden by way of Russia.  But
nearly every Western country was supplying contraband of war to the
Chinese.  Unaccountable hostile aeroplanes with untraceable bombs
appeared in the sky and came humming over the sea to Japan.  Then
in 1935 a Japanese transport blew up and sank in the Gulf of Pe–
chih–li.  In 1936, three Japanese liners were destroyed by mines of
unknown origin within fifty miles of port.  War supplies of all
sorts got into China from Soviet Russia in the north and from the
French and British possessions in the south, and the help and
sympathy of America became more and more manifest as the vast
imperial ambitions of the Japanese leaders became unmistakable.
Western feeling had at first been acutely divided between distrust
of Japan and the desire to see China restored to order on
capitalist lines and saved from Communism.  But with every Japanese
advance European and American feeling veered back towards China.
Australia and New Zealand appealed to the Washington Government for
a joint guarantee to supplement the Imperial tie in 1937.  They
were advocating a mutual guarantee of all the Europeanized regions
of the Pacific.  For a time it seemed as though the Western world
might be guided to a sort of unity by the flares of Japan.  But the
unforgettable humiliations inflicted upon Central Europe after the
war still rankled sufficiently to prevent that.</p><p>Even before the launching of the definitive conquest of China there
had been considerable economic and social stress in Japan.  The
earlier successes, the easy capture of Pekin and the failure of an
adequate Chinese army to materialize, had filled the island empire
with patriotic enthusiasm and hope; the war was brought to a
victorious conclusion three times, and each time it broke out
again.  No invader ever conquered Russia to the end, and no one
ever completed the conquest of China.  Always beyond the subjugated
provinces appeared other provinces swarming with hostility.
Szechwan and the south supplied inexhaustible support and supplies
for the Kuomintang resistance.  It seemed at last as though there
could be no peace any more in China until the invaders fought their
way through to Tibet.</p><p>War weariness descended upon Nippon.  The peasants saw their sons
marching off, never to return, and shortages of ordinary
commodities deepened to famine.  There was already vigorous "Stop
the War" agitation in Japan in 1935; there were continual strikes
in Nagoya and hundreds of casualties, and afterwards there began a
frantic dumping of accumulated goods abroad, to pay not merely for
munitions but for such now vitally essential imports as Australian
meat and Canadian and American corn.  The war was starving the home
fields of men and it was destroying the productivity of large areas
of China.  The social structure of Japan proved to be far too
primitive to emulate the miracles of economy performed by the
Germans during the World War.  The confidence and credit of Japan
sank steadily.  Foreign loans became no longer possible even at
such exorbitant rates as 14 or 15 per cent.  And still there was no
end in sight.</p><p>The Japanese militarists had gone too far to recede.  Behind them
they had a suffering population that might rapidly become
vindictive, and about the arena of the struggle watched Russia,
America and Europe.  According to the best traditions of their
culture, these national leaders resolved on a supreme military
effort, a march in overwhelming force into the central province of
Hupeh.  Colossal preparations were made, and every able–bodied
Japanese who was not already enrolled was called up.  This was to
be "a blow at the heart".</p><p>A convergent march from Nankin, Shantung and Canton was planned.
This dispersal of the bases was justified by the necessity for
living on the country as far as that remained possible.  There were
railways in existence from Canton and Shantung, but they were
difficult to protect, and, apart from them, there was such an utter
want of practicable roads that by the time the Japanese were in
Hupeh a third of their forces were trailed out upon their lines of
communication making roads, and the equipment of heavy guns and
munitions they had been able to bring up was very little superior
to that of the Chinese, who were still fighting with all the wealth
of Szechwan at their backs and the almost overt sympathy of the
West.  The three great Japanese armies effected their junction in a
loose ring round Wuchang—a ring that was for a time slowly drawn
tighter and then ceased to contract.  A deadlock ensued, a deadlock
of mutual exhaustion.  Neither up nor down the river was the
closure of the ring complete.  Throughout 1938, Japan waited for
good news from the long crescents of trenches about Wuchang, and
waited in vain.  Pestilence broke out in July and defeated the
utmost sanitary and medical efforts of the invaders.  Then early
in 1939 they began their retreat to Nankin, with transport
disorganized, with mutiny growing, with all the country rising
about them.</p><p>The horrors of that retreat have never been fully told.  The three
Japanese armies at their maximum strength had numbered well over
two million of men; but probably about a million or less remained
fit enough for the retreat.  Famine was far more deadly with them
than the Chinese guerillas; the exhausted wretches fell out along
the line of march and waited stoically for the end; few prisoners
were taken; the Chinese had no food even if they had had mercy to
give quarter, and the fallen were left to perish in their own time.
The broken remnant that assembled at Nankin did not greatly exceed
a hundred thousand, and still smaller bodies from the lines of
communication fought their way homeward to the north and south.
The rest of these two million lay in the vast cemeteries of Puki
and Ki–chow, or they had been drowned in the floods, or their
bodies were littered as they had dropped and crawled over the sad
monotonous landscape of the Chinese hills.  At Nankin the weary and
dispirited survivors realized that Japan was now also at war with
the United States and that Osaka and Nagoya were in the hands of
Communist Committees.</p><p>For some weeks the Japanese army sprawled inactive in its former
cantonments to the west of Nankin.  Then it revolted, shot many of
its officers, declared for the social revolution and fraternized
with the Chinese Red Army which had marched in under its nose from
Hangchow and taken control of the city proper.</p><p>The entry of the United States into the Eastern War, which did so
much to complete the demoralization of militarist Japan, was the
climax of a prolonged wrangle about the supply of mines and
submarines to the Chinese, that became more and more acute after
the sinking of a Japanese transport in the gulf of Pe–chih–li.</p><p>It is only recently that the full history—which is also a very
tedious and disputatious history—of the sea war against Japan has
been worked out.  Every contemporary record was falsified at the
time; every event hidden completely or elaborately camouflaged.  It
is now fairly evident that not merely did private firms manufacture
mines and build submarine mine–layers but that the various European
navies under the plea of economy sold out a large proportion of
quite modern and valid under–sea craft for "breaking up" to agents
and dealers acting for South American intermediaries.  The
submarines, either intact or so "broken up" that they could easily
be reconstructed, went to various Peruvian and Chilian ports and
thence found their way across the Pacific to the Philippines.  The
Philippine Islands were quasi–independent, but the Manila
declaration of President Roosevelt II in 1937 had practically
extended to them the protection of the Monroe Doctrine, and the
Japanese had never had the surplus energy necessary to challenge
this informal protectorate.  Now these islands became the base for
vexatious attacks upon their overseas trade and sea communications.</p><p>The naval situation in the Pacific was a complicated one.  To the
east of the Philippines lie the Ladrones, a scattered group of
volcanic islands, of which the largest, Guam, had been assigned to
the United States of America by the Treaty of Versailles and was
administered as a part of the American navy, while the rest were
held by Japan under a mandate.  (The Powers previously in
possession had been first Spain and, after 1899, Germany.)  The
Japanese were bound by treaty not to fortify their holdings, but as
the situation grew tense they seem to have ignored this
restriction, at least to the extent of establishing submarine
bases.  Now that the situation was growing tenser the state of
affairs above and under water between the Ladrones, the Philippines
and the Asiatic mainland became darker and more dangerous.  There
was a threatening concentration of the American Fleet between Guam
and the Philippines to ensure the neutrality of the latter, a
patrolling concentration of the Japanese along the Chinese coast,
and an obscure activity of privateering submarines and ambiguous
shipping, which smuggled munitions and supplies and raided weak
points of the Japanese communications.</p><p>Above water a submarine, like any other ship, can fly a flag and
claim the respect due to its nationality, but mines fly no flags,
and under water a submarine may be able to recognize the coded
signals of a co–national but has no means at all of distinguishing
a neutral from an enemy.  Mistakes and pseudo–mistakes were
inevitable.  Two American submarines disappeared in 1936.  Then
several Japanese submarines vanished from the Ladrone archipelago.
Disputes that broke out in neutral cafés came to a murderous end in
the depths.  The American navy took matters into its own hands.  By
1937 an informal naval war had developed in the Western Pacific.</p><p>Neither Power hurried on to an actual declaration of war.  America,
in spite of, or perhaps because of, the bold experimenting of
Roosevelt II, was in a state of deepening economic and political
disorder, and Japan was putting forth her utmost strength for that
disastrous "blow at the heart" in China.  But many of the more
conservative influences in the United States saw in a Pacific war a
saving distraction of public attention and public energy.  There
was an agitation to re–annex the Philippines, and after the
Japanese failure to hold Wuchang the drive towards open war became
uncontrollable.</p><p>The particulars of the brief, destructive and indecisive naval war
that followed need not occupy us here.  The battle fleets met in
the Western Pacific and separated after two days of gunfire and
heavy losses.  Ammunition gave out, it seems, on the Japanese side.
At any rate they drew off in the twilight under a smokescreen.  The
Americans claimed the victory because they were able to go on to
Manila, while the Japanese withdrew to the protection of their
minefields and submarines and were never able to emerge again for
lack of material.  Both Powers were now in a state of deepening
domestic stress, and their war, in a technical sense, never ended.
That is to say, there was no final treaty as between two Powers,
because both had in effect collapsed.  They fell apart.  Social
revolution swept the conflict off the stage.</p><p>[The student will be reminded, by this inconclusive termination, of
the almost incessant, dreary and futile wars of Byzantine and
Sassanid, that devastated Asia Minor for three centuries and did
not so much come to an end as suffer effacement from history by the
sponge of Islam.]</p><p>The social disintegration of Japan, once it had begun, was very
rapid.  The great mass of the population, the peasants, had been
scarcely affected by the process of Westernization, and they lapsed
very readily into the same unprogressive variant of Communism as
their equivalents in Kwantung, Chekiang and Fukien had adopted.  A
small Westernized intelligentzia with many internal feuds and
doctrinal disputes struggled, not very effectively, in the larger
towns to turn this merely insurgent Communism into modern and
constructive paths after the Moscow pattern.  Fragmentation when it
came was swift and thorough.  Militarism degenerated into
brigandage and local feudalism.  Here and there some scion of the
old nobility reappeared with his attendant Samurai as a gangster
boss.</p><p>In the space of a few years all Asia from the Pacific to Persia
seemed to be sliding back to political and social chaos, to hand–
to–mouth cultivation, destitution and endemic pestilence.  For the
greater part of India and most of Further India were also now
drifting back to barbarism.  There also the phrases and the
insubordination, if not the spirit and methods, of Communism had
captured vast multitudes who had remained completely unaffected by
other European ideas.  It was Communism without any Five Year Plan
or indeed any conception of a plan.  It was the class–war in its
ultimate crudity.  It killed money–lenders and tax–collectors with
gusto and elaboration.  It evolved strange religious fanaticisms,
and it abandoned sanitation as "boujawai", the accursed thing.  The
imperial power in India was not overthrown; rather it was stripped
of effective prestige and receded to an immense distance.  The
princes remained formally "loyal", though in some cases they
tacitly annexed "disturbed districts" adjacent to their proper
dominions.  Localities and local adventurers improvised a sort of
social order at a low level and with a continually completer
disregard of any central authority.</p></section><footer/></body></html>