<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>4: Changes in War Practice After the World War</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch02s03.xhtml" title="3: Disintegration and Crystallization in the Social Magma. the Gangster and Militant Political Organizations"/><link rel="next" href="ch02s05.xhtml" title="5: The Fading Vision of a World Pax: Japan Reverts to Warfare"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="4: Changes in War Practice After the World War" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646664700"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">4: Changes in War Practice After the World War</h2></div></div></div><p>The science and practice of warfare during this Age of Frustration,
having now no adequate directing and controlling forces over it,
pursued, in its development, a preposterous and dreadful logic of
its own.</p><p>In 1914, at the outbreak of the World War, military science had
been a pretentious and backward lore.  The War Offices, as we have
told, had allowed the armament industry to put enormously outsize
weapons into their hands, but they had made none of the necessary
mental adjustments needed to meet this change of scale.  All the
land commanders engaged in that struggle with scarcely an exception
were still fighting clumsily according to the obsolete tradition of
nineteenth–century warfare.  They were still thinking in terms of
frontal attack, outflanking, the break–through and so–forth.  We
have told as briefly as we could the horrors of the ensuing
harvest.  The Admiralties, forewarned perhaps by their engineers,
showed a livelier discretion and for the most part hid away their
costly fleets from the disasters of combat in strongly defended
harbours, and allowed them to emerge only on one or two wild
occasions for battle so inconclusive that they were prolonged as
controversies for years afterwards and remain undecided to this
day.  The submarine, the minefield, the aeroplane, the primitive
"tank", organized propaganda to weaken war will, a tentative use of
gas, and the replacement of many of the elder commanders as the war
proceeded did something to modify land fighting, but to the very
last, when the general collapse of "morale" led to the armistice,
the professional soldiers were clinging to the idea that nothing
fundamental had happened to the methods of their ancient and
honoured profession.</p><p>All this changed after the Peace of Versailles.  A spirit of unrest
entered into both the War Offices and Foreign Offices of the world.
They were invaded by a consciousness of great changes none the less
potent because it was belated and had accumulated.  The younger
generals who had been through the war could not put out of their
minds memories of attacks from overhead, gas attacks, tank actions,
and, above all, the loose ungentlemanly comments of temporary
officers of practical ability and unmilitary habits of mind.  These
younger generals aged in their turn, and as they aged they
succeeded to positions of authority.  They came into power
repeating perpetually:  "We must keep pace with the times."</p><p>A phase of extreme innovation succeeded the conservatism of the
older generation.  Everywhere the War Offices stirred with novel
conceptions of strange inventions, secret novelties and furtive
systematic research.  Everywhere the obscure reports of spies and
informants, carefully fostered by the armament dealers affected,
stimulated this forced inventiveness.</p><p>It was realized that the old warfare had in fact perished in a
state of lumpish hypertrophy in the trenches.  It had indeed been a
"war to end war"—and the old war was done for.  The new warfare
had to replace it—and quickly.  The Foreign Offices demanded it.
They could not do without war of some sort.  Sovereignty was war.
The traditional state was an organization against foreigners
resting on the ultimate sanction of belligerence.  They could
imagine no other state of affairs, for to begin with that would
have involved imagining themselves non–existent.  The thirties and
forties of the century teemed with furtive and grotesquely hideous
researches to discover and develop the methods of the New Warfare.
For the only alternative to further war was the abandonment of
state sovereignty, and for that men's minds were altogether
unprepared.</p><p>The changes in war method that went on between 1900 and 1950 C.E.,
with the possible exception of the introduction of firearms between
the twelfth and sixteenth centuries, were far greater than anything
that had ever happened since the earliest men hit and scuffled in
their first rude group encounters.  For endless ages the main
conflict had been the "battle", the encounter of bodies of men on
foot or on horseback.  The infantry had been the traditional
backbone of the army, and (except when the Huns and the Mongols
refused to play according to the rules) the cavalry was secondary.
Artillery was used only for "preparation" before the attack.  So
fought Rameses, so Alexander, so Cæsar, so Napoleon.  The glorious
victories during the romantic ages of human warfare all amounted to
battles of practically the same pattern, to a great central
battering with pikes, swords, bayonets, maces or suchlike
implements, a swiping, pushing, punching, pelting, stabbing, poking
and general clapperclawing amidst a shower of comparatively light
missiles, that went on at longest for a few hours, and ended in a
break, a flight, a cavalry pursuit and a massacre.  This "open
warfare" alternated, it is true, with long sieges, less
sportsmanlike phases, in which the contending hosts refused battle
and squatted unwholesomely in excavations and behind walls,
annoying each other by raids and attempts to storm and break
through, until hunger, pestilence, the decay of discipline under
boredom, or the exasperation of the surrounding population broke up
the party.  Non–combatants suffered considerable temporary and
incidental molestation during warfare, there was a certain amount
of raping and looting, devastation to destroy supplies, pressed
labour and spy–hunting on a scale which amounted in most cases to
little more than an exacerbation of normal criminality.  Wholesale
devastation, such as the break–up of the irrigation of Mesopotamia
by the Mongols, or the laying waste of Northumbria by William the
Conqueror of England, was, when it occurred, a measure of policy
rather than a war measure.  War had to go on for many decades
before it could produce such disorganisation as that of Asia Minor
in the wars between Byzantium and Persia.  The Islamic invasions
were at first made additionally disagreeable by religious
propaganda, but this was speedily replaced by discriminatory
taxation.  The long distance campaigns of Roman, Hunnish and Mongol
armies again spread various once localized infectious and
contagious diseases very widely; but the total influence of the old
warfare upon human destiny was enormously exaggerated by the
nationalist historians of the old régime.  It was of infinitely
less importance than migration.  The peasant life went on
unchangingly, squalid and laborious, as it had been going on for
the majority of human beings since agriculture began.  The various
"Decisive Battles of the World" were high points in that fantasy of
the pedants, the great "drama of the empires", with which they
befogged the human mind for so long during its gropings from the
peasant state of life towards a sane and orderly way of living.</p><p>But with the Napoleonic wars, the soldier began to invade and
modify the texture of normal life as he had never done before, by
conscription, by unprecedented monetary levies, indemnities and
taxes that dislocated economic processes; and conversely, quite
uninvited by the soldier, as we have shown, the expanding forces of
power industrialism and of mass manipulation through journalistic
and other sorts of propaganda, invaded both the military field and
the common life.  War, which had been like the superficial
ploughing of our ancestors, became a subsoil plough, an excavator
that went deeper and deeper, that began presently to deflect
underground springs and prepare extensive landslides.</p><p>The Generals of the World War were all in the position of
inexperienced amateurs in charge of vast mechanisms beyond their
power of control.  War, which formerly had been fought on the flat
along a "front", suddenly reached through and over the contending
armies, and allowed no one to stand out of it any more.  The New
Warfare, it was already being remarked by 1918, was a war of whole
populations, from which all respect for the non–combatant was
vanishing.  People said this, and some few even tried to understand
in detail what it meant.  And now all over the world military
gentlemen, many of them still adorned with the spurs, epaulettes,
froggings, buttons, stripes, ribbons, medals, residual scraps of
armour and suchlike pretty glories of the good old times, set
themselves most valiantly to work out the possibilities and methods
of the New Warfare.</p><p>Courage was always the better part of the military tradition, and
nothing could exceed the courage with which these men set
themselves throughout this period to overtake the march of
invention, to master engineering and engineers, chemistry and
chemists, war correspondents and newspaper editors, biology,
medicine, and even finance, in their efforts to keep that ancient
war idea, the idea of the battling sovereign state, alive.  As we
have seen, the schools stood loyally by them; they had the support
of the armament industries, and, less whole–heartedly perhaps, the
approval of the old religions and of the old royalties and
loyalties.  Their activities were profoundly stupid, but the
grotesque horror of their achievements, the distress and
unhappiness of three generations of our race, are still recent
enough to mask their ludicrous quality.</p><p>The literature of the military science of this period is a copious
one, and perhaps the best survey of it all is Fuller–Metsch's The
Ideas of the New Warfare in the Middle Twentieth Century (2001).
Therein the writer sets himself to three enquiries:  "For what did
they suppose they were going to fight?"  "How were they going to
fight?"  And "What did they consider would constitute a definitive
end and winding–up of their fighting?"</p><p>The answer he gives is a composite one.  No single individual seems
to have grasped the New Warfare in its entirety.  With a solemn
pedantry, a pretentious modesty, each "expert" dealt with his own
department and left it to Fate to put the assembled parts together
into a whole.  But what the composite soldier of 1935 was
contemplating rather foggily seems to have been very much as
follows.  He conceived the world as divided up among a number of
governments or Powers.  These were the sovereign states as the
Treaty of Westphalia (1642) presented them.  All these powers were
competitive and passively or actively hostile.  The intervals when
the hostility was active were wars.  The intervals of recuperation
and preparation were peace.  War was a cessation of a truce between
the belligerents, a cessation arising out of an irreconcilable
dispute or clash of interests, and the objective then of each Power
was to impose its Will upon its enemy.  In the days before the
twentieth century this imposition of Will was done more or less
professionally by the governments and armies.  One or other Power
took the offensive, crossed its borders and marched on the enemy
seat of government.  After various operations and battles the
capital would be captured or the invader driven back to his own,
and a peace made and a treaty signed more or less in accordance
with the Will of the victor.  Boundaries would be adjusted in
accordance with that Will, colonies transferred, indemnities
arranged for; the victorious Power expanded and the defeated
shrivelled.  The people of the unsuccessful Power would be very
much ashamed of themselves.  To the end of the nineteenth century
this formula was observed.</p><p>But by the time of the World War much more than the disappearance
of the "front" and the increasing entanglement of the erstwhile
non–combatants was happening to this procedure.  The Powers were
losing their definite identities.  The fine question of what
constituted a responsible government capable of imposing a Will, or
giving in to it, arose.  In Russia, for example, was the new
Communist régime responsible for the obligations of the Autocracy?
Was Germany, were all the Germans, to be held responsible for
Krupp–Kaiser militarism?  Was a dummy Sultan in Constantinople, or
Kemal Pasha in Angora, the proper authority to consent to the
dismemberment of Turkey?  Again, the United States of America had
come gaily into the war and then declined effective participation
in President Wilson's settlement.  He had not, it seemed, been a
plenipotentiary.  Was that behaving as a Power should behave?</p><p>Still further perplexities arose about the laws of war.  If the
front was abolished, if civilians were to be bombed from the air,
what became of the right of professional soldiers to shoot franc–
tireurs and destroy their homes?  It was as if the arena of a
football match were invaded by the spectators, who began kicking
the ball about, chasing the referee, and declining to keep any
score as between the original sides in the game.</p><p>The military authority recoiled from these devastating riddles of
the new age.  Such issues, he decided, were not for him.  There had
always been sides in a war, and there must still be sides.  It was
for the politicians to define them.  He fell back on his
fundamental conception of a Power "imposing its Will" upon another
Power, but using now, in addition to the old invasion and march on
the capital, the new methods of propaganda, blockades and attacks
behind the front, and all the latest chemical and aerial devices to
"undermine the morale" of the enemy population and dispose its
government to yield.  In the end there must be a march, if only a
concluding professional march, through the goal or capital of the
losing side.  He refused to entertain the inevitable problem of an
enemy government not yielding but collapsing, and leaving no
responsible successor.  That was not his affair.  Presumably in
that case the war would continue indefinitely.</p><p>Nor was it his business to enter into the financial aspects of the
matter, to estimate any ratio whatever between the costs of the New
Warfare and the material advantages to be exacted when the Will of
the conqueror was imposed.  In that regard he was excessively
modest.  He could not be expected to think of everything.  His
business was to prepare the best and most thorough war possible,
with all the latest improvements, and quite regardless of cost, for
his Power.  It was for his government to find out how to pay for
and use the war he had prepared for it.  Or to use it partially.
War, just war itself, was the limit of his task.</p><p>Research for the latest improvements soon led the now almost
morbidly progressive military mind to some horrifying discoveries.
Some of the soldiers concerned were certainly badly scared by the
realization of what evils it was now possible to inflict in
warfare.  It leaked out in their speeches and books.  But they kept
on.  They kept on partly because they had a stout–hearted tradition
and refused to be dismayed, but mainly no doubt for the same reason
that the Christian priests and bishops who had lost their faith
still stuck to their Churches—because it was the only job they
could do.  Throughout the three decades that followed the Congress
of Versailles, thousands of highly intelligent men, specialist
soldiers, air soldiers, engineering soldiers, chemical, medical
soldiers and the like, a far ampler and more energetic personnel
than that devoted to the solution of the much more urgent and
important financial riddles of the time, were working out, with
unstinted endowments and the acquiescence and approval of their
prospective victims, patiently, skilfully, thoroughly, almost
inconceivably, abominable novelties for the surprise and torture of
human beings.</p><p>None of these experts seems to have been more than mediocre; it was
an age of mental and moral mediocrities; and even within the
accepted limitation we have already noted, none of them seems to
have worked out the New Warfare as a whole complete process.
Groups of men working in secrecy, immune from outer criticism,
naturally conspire not only against the foreigner but against each
other, and most of the men in decisive positions were rather men
skilled in securing appointments and promotion than inspired
specialists.  A certain lumbering quality in their devices ensued.</p><p>In Great Britain a group of these experts became exceedingly busy
in what was called mechanical warfare.  The British had first
invented, and then made a great mess of, the tank in the World War,
and they were a tenacious people.  The authorities stuck to it
belatedly but doggedly.  In a time of deepening and ever bitterer
parsimony their War Office spared no expense in this department.
It was the last of all to feel the pinch.  The funny land ironclads
of all sizes these military "inventors" produced, from a sort of
armoured machine–gunner on caterpillar wheels up to very
considerable mobile forts, are still among the queerest objects in
the sheds of the vast war dumps which constitute the Aldershot
Museum.  They are fit peers for Admiral Fisher's equally belated
oil Dreadnoughts.</p><p>The British dream of the next definitive war seems to have involved
a torrent of this ironmongery tearing triumphantly across Europe.
In some magic way (too laborious to think out) these armoured Wurms
were to escape traps, gas poison belts, mines and gunfire.  There
were even "tanks" that were intended to go under water, and some
that could float.  Hansen even declared (see The Last War
Preparations, xxiv, 1076) that he had found (rejected) plans of
tanks to fly and burrow.  Most of these contrivances never went
into action.  That throws a flavour of genial absurdity over this
particular collection that is sadly lacking from most war museums.</p><p>The British and the French experts, and presently the Germans, also
worked very hard at the fighting aeroplane—the British and Germans
with the greatest success; the aerial torpedo, controllable at
immense distances, was perfected almost simultaneously by the
Italians and the Japanese.  The French mind, for all its native
brilliance, was hampered by its characteristic reluctance to scrap
old plant for new.  It was the German, American and Russian experts
who went furthest with the possibilities of chemical attack.  The
disarmament of Germany necessarily forced its military authorities
to concentrate on an arm that could be studied, experimented upon
and prepared unknown to the outer world, and the Russians were
forced to take up parallel enquiries because of their relative
industrial poverty.  The Germans had been first to use gas in the
Great War, and they remained for a long time the war gas pioneers.
But after the Great War much attention was given to this arm in
America through the influence of the chemical industry.  Biological
warfare, that is to say the distribution of infectious diseases,
was also extensively studied, America and the Central Europeans in
this case leading the way.</p><p>Even before the Central European fighting in 1940 and the
subsequent years, the distribution of various disease germs was no
longer a merely theoretical possibility.  Little containers, made
to look like fountain pens, were already being manufactured.  The
caps could be removed to expose soluble ends, and then they could
be dropped into reservoirs or running streams.  Glass bombs also
existed for use from aeroplanes, railway–train windows and so
forth, which would break on hitting water.  There are specimens in
the Aldershot Museum.  The enrolment and territorial organization
of medical men and trained assistants to inoculate threatened
populations went on with increasing vigour after 1932.</p><p>But there was a certain hesitation about the use of disease germs.
It is easy to distribute them but hard to limit their field of
action, and if prisoners (military or civilian) were still to be
taken and towns and territory occupied, a well launched pestilence
might conceivably recoil with deadly effect upon its users.
Bacterial warfare seemed, even to the specialists who studied it, a
very improbable method for any but an heroically vindictive
population in the hour of defeat.  Nevertheless it was thought best
to have it worked out.  Except for the distribution of malignant
influenza in Kan–su and Shensi by the Japanese during their efforts
to tranquillize North China in 1936, "without proceeding to
extremities", its use was never officially admitted.  Other alleged
instances of its deliberate employment by responsible Powers have
been shown by the researches of the Historical Bureau to have been
due either to the unauthorized zeal of subordinates or to the
activities of those religious fanatics who became so prevalent
during the period of confusion after 1945.  The acclimatization of
the mosquito transmitting yellow fever in India in 1950, which did
so much to diminish the population of that peninsula, has never
been explained.  It is generally supposed to have been accidental.</p><p>So far as method and invention went, what was called "Gas Warfare"
ran very parallel to bacterial warfare.  Its beginning and end is
now a closed chapter in the history of the human intelligence and
will.  It is surely one of the strangest.  It set its stamp upon
the clothing and urban architecture of the age.  It ranks in horror
with the story of judicial torture or the story of ritual
cannibalism, but its inhumanity is more striking because of its
nearness to our own times.  Like those older instances, it brings
home to us the supreme need for sound common general ideas to hold
together human activities.  It tells how thousands of clear and
active minds, each indisputably sane, could, in an atmosphere
obsessed by plausible false assumptions about patriotic duty and
honour, cooperate to produce a combined result fantastically futile
and cruel.</p><p>The people engaged in this business were, on the whole,
exceptionally grave, industrious and alert–minded.  Could they
revisit the world to–day individually we should probably find them
all respectable, companionable, intelligible persons.  Yet in the
aggregate they amounted to an organization of dangerous lunatics.
They inflicted dreadful deaths, hideous sufferings or tormented
lives upon, it is estimated, about a million of their fellow
creatures.</p><p>Most of the lethal substances prepared for gas warfare purposes
have passed altogether out of general knowledge.  They are either
never manufactured now or they are produced upon rare occasions and
under proper control for the purposes of physiological research.
The old devices and appliances for their distribution seem,
nowadays, like grotesque anticipations of many of the features of
the large scale agricultural and hygienic operations that are
carried out to–day.  The treatment of locust swarms by air attack,
the spraying of the reafforested regions against various tree
diseases, the regular cleansing and stimulation of our grain and
root crops are all subsequent rationalizations of these practices
of the Age of Frustration.</p><p>Faber, that Calvinistic optimist, with his doctrine that the bad is
all to the good in this maddest of all conceivable worlds, thinks
that all these big scale methods were "enormously stimulated" by
the crazy inventiveness of the war period.  But then he has also
suggested that the aeroplane would not have come into general use
for many years without war stimulation.  We venture to think he
carries his doctrine of the attainment of wisdom through imbecility
too far.  It is really only a modernization of Charles Lamb's story
of the invention of the roast pig.  It had the touch of
Rasputinism, this revival of the ancient heresy that one must sin
THOROUGHLY before one can be saved.</p><p>Much more after the gas–war pattern were the campaigns (2033 and
2035) against rats and mice, that finally cleansed the world of the
lurking poison of that medieval terror, bubonic plague, and the
distributions of "festivity gas", that were permitted in various
regions in 2060.  The countervailing use of benign–gases as a
subsidiary to the suppression of the depressing cometary toxins of
2080 will also occur to the reader.  The oxygenation of council
chambers, factories, playing–fields and similar loci demanding
special brightness and activity, and the use of Padanath Tagore's
Lotus Gas in the Himalayan rest valleys, we may note, are also
claimed by Faber as part of the legacy of gas warfare.</p><p>One or two of the offensive substances actually manufactured for
war purposes are now utilized in relation to very special and
specially protected processes in our industrial plants.  The
preparation of some of them is a major felony.  They were a very
various miscellany, for every chemical possibility was ransacked to
find them.  Very few of them were actually gases.  Many were
volatile liquids or even finely divided solids, which were to be
sprayed or dusted over positions in enemy occupation.  Dr. Gertrud
Woker, in a paper on this subject contributed to an enquiry by the
Interparliamentary Union in 1931, gave a useful summary of the
existing state of knowledge at that time.  In conjunction with
various colleagues (What Would Be the Character of a New War?
Historical Documents 937,205), she allows us to form an estimate of
what was actually being contemplated by contemporary military
experts.  Except for one important exception, her list covers all
the main types of poison gas substances that were actually
prepared.  This spate of investigation culminated about 1938.  By
that time the entire field had been explored.  After that there
were improvements but no major innovations.</p><p>After 1940 even military research was restricted by the increasing
financial paralysis.  In 1960 no plants capable of producing
material for gas warfare on a sufficiently abundant scale were
operating.</p><p>Of gases actually tried out in the World War itself, the chief seem
to have been chlorine and various chlorine compounds (phosgene,
Green Cross gas, chloropicrin and so forth).  These attacked and
destroyed the lung tissue.  Chlorine was used by the Germans as
early as April 1915 at Ypres when 6,000 men were killed by it; it
was soon abandoned, because it was so immediately irritating that
its presence was detected at once, and precautionary measures could
be taken.  The other gases in this class got to work less frankly.
Presently the victim began to cough.  Then as the destruction of
the bronchioles and alveoli of the lungs went on he retched and
suffocated and coughed up blood and tissue.  He died amidst his
expectorations with a visage blue and bloated and bloodstained
froth on his lips.  If by good luck he survived, he survived with
his lungs so injured that he easily fell a victim to tuberculosis
or suchlike disease.  Most of this group of gases had their own
characteristic complications.  One series, for instance, would
attack the nervous system, causing wild excitement, terror,
convulsions, screams and paralysis.  Thousands of men had already
died in agony from Green Cross gas during the World War, and the
plans of some of these experts involved the massacre of whole
populations in the same atrocious fashion.  Green Cross gas was
used, but not in sufficient strength to be very deadly, in the
Polish bombing of Berlin in May 1940, and in a more concentrated
form in the aerial torpedoes that were sent from Germany to Warsaw.
It had been used also at Nankin in 1935 and in the Chinese reprisal
at Osaka.</p><p>Yellow Cross gas, or mustard gas, was much more insidious and also
more cruel and murderous.  It was not really a gas; it was a
volatile liquid.  When cold, it spread unsuspected in a thin film
over the ground, getting on to boots and clothing, being carried
hither and thither.  Slowly, as it vaporized, its presence was
revealed.  Discomfort came, a horrible suspicion, fear and then
coughing and retching.  It involved quite frightful and hopeless
suffering.  Steadily but surely it killed every living substance
with which it came into contact; it burnt it, blistered it, rotted
it away.  One part of mustard gas in five million of air was
sufficient to affect the lungs.  It ate into the skin, inflamed the
eyes; it turned the muscles into decaying tissue.  It became a
creeping disease of the body, enfeebling every function, choking,
suffocating.  It is doubtful if any of those affected by it were
ever completely cured.  Its maximum effect was rapid torture and
death; its minimum prolonged misery and an abbreviated life.  The
gases used in the fighting in North China in 1934–37 and in the
Chinese raids upon Japan were mostly of this group.  And an
evacuation of Berlin in 1946 was brought about by the threat of
Yellow Cross bombs.</p><p>[They were actually dropped, but either through accident or by the
insubordination of the chemists employed by the Poles, they smashed
ineffectively.  It was one of the most striking instances of what
appears to have been the pacificist sabotage that helped to end the
formal warfare in Central Europe.  Five of the chemical workers
concerned were shot and seventeen given long sentences of
imprisonment, but none of the records of their trial has survived.]</p><p>Allied rather than competing with these gases of the Green and
Yellow Cross categories, Dr. Woker cites the Blue Cross group.
These substances were essentially direct nervous irritants in the
form of an almost impalpable dust.  They could penetrate most of
the gas masks then in use, and produced such pain, so violent a
sneezing and nausea, and such a loss of self–control that the
victim would tear off his mask, so exposing himself to the Green or
Yellow vapours with which Blue Cross was usually associated.</p><p>All these torments had been extensively inflicted already during
the World War, but after its conclusion the secret activities of
the various poison gas departments were sustained with great
energy.  It took them nearly twenty years even to open up the main
possibilities of their speciality.  One substance, which played a
large part in the discussions of the time, was "Lewisite", the
discovery of a Professor Lewis of Chicago, which came too late for
actual use before the end of 1918.  This was one of a group or
arsenical compounds.  One part of it in ten millions of air was
sufficient to put a man out of action.  It was inodorous,
tasteless; you only knew you had it when it began to work upon you.
It blistered as much as mustard gas and produced a violent
sickness.</p><p>Other war poisons followed upon this invention, still more deadly:
merciful poisons that killed instantly and cruel and creeping
poisons that implacably rotted the brain.  Some produced
convulsions and a knotting up of the muscles a hundred times more
violent than the once dreaded tetanus.  There is a horrible
suggestiveness in the description of the killing of a flock of
goats for experimental purposes in these researches:  "All
succumbed to the effect of the gas except three, which dashed their
brains out against the enclosure."  And to assist these chemicals
in their task of what Dr. Woker calls "mass murder" there was a
collateral research into incendiary substances and high explosives,
to shatter and burn any gas attack shelter to which a frightened
crowd might resort.</p><p>Dr. Woker's summary does not include Kovoet's invention of the
permanent Death Gas in 1934.  Its composition is still a secret and
its very complicated preparation a felony.  This compound, although
not absolutely permanent, decomposed with extreme slowness.  It was
in itself neither a gas nor a poison.  It was a heavy, rather
coarse–grained powder.  It evaporated as camphor does, and as it
evaporated it combined with oxygen to form a poison effective when
diluted with fifty million times its volume of air.  Its action was
essentially of the Lewisite type.  This was actually used in the
first Polish War to cut off East Prussia.  A zone of territory from
a mile to three miles wide along the whole frontier was evacuated
and dusted with Permanent Death Gas.  East Prussia became a
peninsula accessible only from Lithuania or by sea.  In spite of
the heaviness of the grains, the winds finally widened this band of
death to about fifteen miles in width and carried its lethal
influence into the suburbs of Danzig.</p><p>This murdered region was not re–entered, except by a few specially
masked explorers, until after 1960, and then it was found to be
littered with the remains not only of the human beings, cattle and
dogs who had strayed into it, but with the skeletons and scraps of
skin and feathers of millions of mice, rats, birds and suchlike
small creatures.  In some places they lay nearly a metre deep.  War
Pictures has two photographs of this strange deposit.  Vegetation
was not so completely destroyed; trees died and remained bare and
pickled; some grasses suffered, but others of the ranker sort
flourished, and great areas were covered by a carpet of dwarfed and
stunted corn–cockles and elecampane set in grey fluff.</p><p>A curious by–product of Permanent Death Gas is what is now known as
the Sterilizing Inhalation.  This was first made by accident.  A
Chinese Vindication Society organized an air raid on Osaka and
Tokio in 1935 after the great Green Cross raid on Nankin in that
year.  It was intended to strike terror into the Japanese mind.
Permanent Death Powder was to have been used, but because of the
haste and danger of the preparations the Chinese had not tested it
out, and here again, either by accident or design, things went
wrong; the formula, it seems, had been falsified.  Consequently,
when the raid was made—all the machines employed were brought down
on their way home—nothing ensued but a temporary fever accompanied
by retching and purging.</p><p>There was much derision of the unfortunate aviators in Japan.  It
was only some months after that the Western World learnt that the
medical services of both towns were reporting a complete cessation
of early pregnancies.  Not a litter of kittens or puppies had
appeared for weeks, mares were no longer foaling nor cows in calf.
Mice and rats vanished.  The sterilization in all cases was
permanent.  But birds were not affected for reasons that Crayford–
Huxley has since made clear.  The sparrows multiplied enormously
and the hens still clucked triumphantly in these childless cities.</p><p>In some way the Chinese chemists had blundered upon one of those
rare sub–radiant gases known as Pabst's Kinetogens, which affect
the genes.  A whole series of these are now known to biologists,
chiefly through the work of Pabst and his assistants, and most of
the more extraordinary flower sports and new aberrant animal types
in our experimental gardens are due to their employment; but for a
long time, until indeed Pabst took up the subject with an insight
all his own, only the Sterilization Inhalation was known.  Most of
the campaigns in the Forties of the twenty–first century against
contagious rodents made an extensive use of this gas wherever
regions could be isolated from human intrusion, and the day may not
be distant when it will have important eugenic applications.</p><p>But the Japanese experience produced even a greater sensation
throughout the world than the actual slaughter of the victims would
have occasioned.  The militarist class in Japan was as deeply
sentimental as the Western equivalent in Europe, and as resolute
that the common people should not only die but breed fresh battle
fodder for their country.  Until the patriots realized that the
Chinese supply of this stuff was limited, they lived in horror.
They saw themselves stripped bare of subject lives.  They saw
themselves extinct in the hour of victory.  There was a great
clamour about the world for the extensive application of this new
find during the fiercer war years; there are proposals on record
(Hate Eugenics, Historical Documents 5752890 and seq.) to apply it
from the air to Palestine, Arabia, Ireland, the whole of China and
the African Continent in part or as a whole.  But mankind was saved
from any such catastrophe by the fact that the first production of
Sterilizing Inhalation was essentially accidental.  It had been
prepared furtively, its makers were untraceable, and the proper
formula was not worked out and made controllable until our insane
world was well in the grip of the harsh humanity of the Air
Dictatorship.</p><p>How all these hideous devices of the New Warfare were to be brought
together to effect the definitive subjugation of the Will of a
belligerent Power was apparently never thought out, or, if it was,
the plans were kept so secret that now they have perished with
their makers.  After the millions had choked, after the cities were
a stench of dead bodies—what then?</p><p>Perhaps the artistic interest of the business precluded such remote
considerations.  All we can disentangle now of this gas warfare, as
its experts contemplated it, consists of projects of mere mischief
and torture.  They seem imbued with much the same wanton
destructiveness as that displayed by some of the younger specimens
among the Loando–Mobi chimpanzee hybrids.</p><p>Yet some of these plans are amazingly thorough up to a certain
point—up to the point when one asks, "But WHY?"  For instance, in
the Marine War Museum in the Torcello Lagoon there are no fewer
than half a dozen raider submarines built for four different great
Powers, and all specially designed as long–distance bases for gas
warfare.  They carried no guns nor ordinary fighting equipment.
They had practically unlimited cruising range, and within them from
five to nine aeroplanes were packed with a formidable supply of gas
bombs.  One of them carried thirty long–range air torpedoes with
all the necessary directional apparatus.  There were four different
types of gas mixture in the bombs, but they differed little in
character and efficiency.  The smallest of these raiders carried
enough of such stuff to "prepare" about eight hundred square miles
of territory.  Completely successful, it could have turned most of
the London or New York of that time, after some clamour and running
and writhing and choking, into a cityful of distorted corpses.
These vessels made London vulnerable from Japan, Tokio vulnerable
from Dublin; they abolished the last corners of safety in the
world.</p><p>These six sinister monsters gleam now in the great gallery side by
side, their poison fangs drawn, their mission abandoned, the grim
vestiges, the uncontrovertible evidence of one nightmare among the
many nightmares of hate and evil that afflicted the human brain
during the Age of Frustration.  There they are.  Men made them—as
men made the instruments of torture during the previous dark ages.
Even amidst the happy confidence of our present life it is well
that we should remember that, given different conditions, men
technically as sane as ourselves could design and make these
things.</p><p>There is something revolting in these details.  We have given
enough for our purpose.  History must not be made a feast of
horror.  From first to last gas warfare destroyed very painfully
between one and one and a quarter million lives that might have
been fruitful and happy.  That much mischief was done.  They
suffered and they have gone.  The gist of our story is that, after
the humiliation and quickening of the military mind by the
ineptitudes of the World War, belligerent science did not so much
progress as lose itself in the multiplicity of its own inventions.
It developed one frightful and monstrous contrivance after another,
to dismay and torment mankind, to spread ill health and hate, to
demoralize and destroy industrial life, to make whole countries
uninhabitable and loosen every band that held men together in
orderly societies, but it made no steps at all to any comprehensive
and decisive conduct of war.  With no plan for the future, with no
vision of the world as a whole at all, these thousands of furtive
specialists, these "damned ingenious patriots", as Isaac Burtonshaw
(1913–2003) called them, went on accumulating, here frightful
explosives, there stores of disgusting disease germs, and there
again stores of this or that fantastically murderous gas.</p><p>No comprehensive plan held any of these centres of evil together
into one premeditated whole, as, for instance, the military
preparations of the Hohenzollern Empire were held together by a
clear and deliberate scheme of conclusive warfare.  Beneath the
vulgar monarchist claptrap of the German effort of 1914 there was
indeed a real scheme for the reorganization and modernization of
civilization about a Teutonic nucleus according to Teutonic ideals.
It may have had its fatuous elements, but it was logical and
complete.  But war planning never recovered that completeness after
1914; never got back to the same logical foundations.  After that
belligerence lost its head.  It still went on as everything else
went on in those days—by inertia.  But it had no longer any idea
of what it was up to.</p><p>Yet over all the world these incoherent mines were prepared, and
they might well have exploded, had their release been simultaneous,
into such an outbreak of disorderly evil as staggers the
contemporary imagination.  It is conceivable that they might have
destroyed mankind.  It would have needed no change in the essential
conditions but only a rearrangement of the determining accidents to
have brought about that final catastrophe.</p><p>This menace of a chaos of disasters and aimless cruelties hung over
a disorganized and unprotected world for three–quarters of a
century.  It is what some historians call the Period of Maximum
Insecurity, from 1935 to 1965.  Here and there quite monstrous
things occurred—at Nankin, Pekin, Osaka, Berlin, Warsaw, for
instance; things terrible enough to hearten and steel the better
elements in humanity for the achievement of that world peace
towards which all these forces were urging it.  Fortunately for
mankind the two fundamental evils of traditionalism were just
sufficient to neutralize each other during this long period of the
incubation of the Modern State.  The greed of the creditor balanced
the greed of the armament dealer.  As armaments grew more and more
costly, the possible purchasers grew poorer and poorer.  If Economy
starved and hampered many good things in human life, it did at
least finally take all vigour and confidence out of the development
of the New Warfare.  The Chemical Armament industry followed the
other typical institutions of the old order into the general social
liquidation which wound up the bankruptcy of Private Profit
Capitalism.</p></section><footer/></body></html>