<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>11: Europe in 1960</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch02s10.xhtml" title="10: The Raid of the Germs"/><link rel="next" href="ch02s12.xhtml" title="12: America in Liquidation"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="11: Europe in 1960" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646842080"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">11: Europe in 1960</h2></div></div></div><p>The more advanced student of history finds it necessary to work out
in detail the local variations of the process by which the great
patchwork of empires and nationalist states, set up during the Age
of European Predominance, lost its defining lines, lost its
contrasted cultures and its elaborated traditions, and ceased to
divide the allegiance and devotion of men of goodwill.  It was
still standing—a hollow shell in 1933; in 1966 it had gone.  It
crumpled up, it broke down; its forms melted together and
disappeared.</p><p>For the purposes of general education, the intricate interplay of
personalities and accidents in this world débâcle can be passed
over, as we pass over the details of the Great War or of Napoleon's
various military campaigns, and as Gibbon, the author of the
Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (published between 1776 and
1788) passed over a thousand years of Byzantine court life.
Nowadays that sort of history has become a mine for those admirable
biographical studies which are ousting the old romantic novel from
the entertainment of our leisure so soon as our imaginations have
passed beyond the purely romantic stage.  All that is needed for
our present purpose is some understanding of the broader forces
that were operating through this lush jungle of human reactions.</p><p>The tempo of human affairs increases continually, and the main
difference between the decline and fall of the Roman system and the
decline and fall of the world rule of private–profit capitalism in
the Twentieth Century lies in the far more rapid onset and
development of the later collapse.  A second important difference is
the much livelier understanding of what was happening on the part of
the masses involved.  Each of these two great depressions in the
record of human well–being was primarily a monetary breakdown, due
to the casual development of financial and proprietary law and
practice without any reference to a comprehensive well–being, and to
the lag in political and educational adaptation which left the whole
system at last completely without guidance.  But while the former
débâcle went to the pace of the horse on the paved road and of the
written and spoken word, the phases of the new downfall flashed
about the globe instantaneously and evoked a body of thought and
reaction out of all comparison greater than the Roman precedent.  So
we see only a much compressed and abbreviated parallelism.  From the
demoralization of the deflated Roman Empire by the great plagues at
the end of the second century of the Christian era, to the
reappearance of commerce, industry, art and politeness in the cities
of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, was well over a thousand
nerveless years; from the invasion of Belgium by the Germans in 1914
to the return of general material prosperity under the Air
Dictatorship after 2010 was roughly a century.</p><p>The mental process, if for this reason alone, was much more
continuous.  It got to its conclusions while still in contact with
its premises.  The first world collapse was spread over a number of
generations, each one oblivious of the experiences of its
predecessor, but the larger and swifter part of the second world
collapse fell well within the compass of a single long life.
People who could remember the plentiful and relatively stable times
between 1924 and 1928 as young men and women were still only at the
riper end of middle age in 1960.  Many who were children at the
onset of the Hoover Slump were taking an active part in affairs in
the days of the first international police, the Police of the Air
and Sea Ways.  It was possible to grasp what was happening as one
whole.  It is doubtful if any Roman citizen under the Empire ever
grasped what was happening.</p><p>Nevertheless in each case there was a parallel obliteration of old
ideas, the same effacement of boundaries, the same destruction of
time–honoured traditions, the lapsing of debts and obligations, the
disappearance of religious and educational organizations, the
impoverishment of favoured and privileged classes, the recrudescence
of lawlessness, the cleansing disillusionment.  Each was the
effectual liquidation of a bankrupt civilization preparatory to a
drastic reconstruction.</p><p>We will now take a sort of rough cross–section of the world at
about the date of 1960 C.E., and consider the condition of the main
masses of the world's population and the great forces at work among
them.  In the light of subsequent events we can realize that there
was already a very considerable convergence of conditions going on
throughout the middle decades of the century.  But it may be
doubted whether that was evident at the time.  The goal towards
which the fundamental bionomic forces were driving was everywhere
the same, but the particulars varied widely with the geographical,
ethnic and traditional circumstances, and their immediate
interpretations were even more diverse.</p><p>We have viewed the events of the Era of European Predominance as
the outcome of an uncontrolled irregularity in growth, of economic
hypertrophy in a phase of political and cultural atrophy.  An
immense increase in the energy of human society had occurred which
had relieved itself partly in a great multiplication of the human
population (Europe from 180 to 420 millions between 1800 and 1914,
says Werner Sombart, in spite of a great emigration), partly in a
monstrous exaggeration of warfare, and less considerably in an
increased fullness and speed of the individual life.  But, as we
have related, the forces of conservativism and functional
resistance embodied in the creditor and legal systems were
presently able to give pause to the release of fresh energy.  For
the second time in human experience the inadaptable quality of the
financial and proprietary organization produced a strangulation and
an arrest.</p><p>The money and credit organization of the prosperity of the
nineteenth century differed in many respects from, and was more
elaborate than, the Roman, but its life history was essentially the
same.  It wound itself up in the same fashion.  First came a vast
expansion and increase of private fortunes and then destructive
taxation.  So far history repeated itself.  The European system,
like the Roman system before it, impoverished itself finally by the
violent expenditure of its vast windfall of energy.  It repeated
the same blind story of wastage, but with the unprecedented
headlong facilities science afforded it.  It ran through its
available fortune and was helplessly in debt in a few decades.  The
height of its expenditure was between 1914 and 1950.  Thereafter
the pace was less catastrophic.</p><p>Regarded even as destruction the New Warfare proved in the end to
be a failure.  It went to pieces when it was attempted.  It did not
kill as it might have killed—which is why the reader is alive to
read this history.  The actual battles of the European wars in the
Forties—the purely military operations, that is to say—in all
their ramifications cost mankind hardly a quarter of the battle
slaughters of 1914–1918.  And yet they mark the highest level of
scientific fighting ever attained by mankind.  The Asiatic troubles
had been more destructive because they were nearer the barbaric
level, but even there the actual deaths in warfare are estimated as
under nine million.  Of these, nearly five million are to be
ascribed to the final offensive of Japan in 1938, the deadlock in
Central China, the desperate fighting with the Kuomintang levies
west of Hankow, and the subsequent retreat.</p><p>Man had fallen as short as all that of the magnificent horrors he
had anticipated.  He had failed to raise war to its ultimate
mechanical level.  The social and political dislocation following
upon these two main struggles was indeed proportionately far
greater than the disorder of 1917–1919, but warfare was its prelude
rather than its cause.  This New Warfare, which the prophets had
said would end in a scientific massacre of mankind, passed
insensibly into a squalor of political fiascos, unpayable debts,
unsubscribed loans, scrapped machinery, insurrection, guerilla and
bandit conflicts, universal hunger and the great pestilences.  Gas
Warfare and Air War faded out of the foreground of human
experience, dwarfed and overwhelmed by the more primitive realities
of panic, famine and fever.  The ultimate victor in the middle
twentieth century was the germ of maculated fever.  The main causes
in the fall of the world's population from about two thousand
million in 1930 to a little under half that total in 1960 were
diseases or simple starvation, arising directly from the complete
economic collapse.  Where war slew its millions in a few great
massacres, pestilence slew its hundreds of millions in a pitiless
pursuit that went on by day and night for two terrific years.</p><p>As Imhoff has said, there is no single European history of these
Famished and Pestilential Fifties which followed so swiftly on the
war years; there are ten million histories.  The various
governments created by the Treaty of Versailles were for the most
part still legally in existence throughout this age, but with the
monetary cessation they had become so faded and ineffective that
they had ceased to have any great influence on everyday life.
Some, like the British and the French, limited their activities to
efforts—generally quite futile efforts, at tax–collecting; they
went on finally in a way which will remind the student of the old
tribute–levying Empires before the Helleno–Latin period.  They
interfered spasmodically with local affairs, but for the most part
they let them drift.  They ignored or compromised with active
resistance.  The British government was still, it seems, paying
arrears upon its various loans, in 1952, to such stockholders as it
was able to trace.  The records are obscure; the payments seem to
have been made in a special paper currency without real purchasing
power.  Other governments, like the Italian and Spanish, carried on
as real administrative bodies within restricted areas.  Rome, for
instance, remained in fairly effective control of the triangle
marked out by Genoa, Florence and the Mediterranean Coast, and
Barcelona and Madrid kept order throughout most of the Peninsula
except the Sovietized Spanish Riviera, Portugal and Andalusia.</p><p>The process in America was roughly parallel.  Detachment was easier
so soon as the bankrupt railways ceased to operate there, because
the distances between population centres were greater and the
capacity of the people for local autonomy much greater.  They were
still not a century from pioneering.  The railways never resumed
after the pestilence.  The authority of the Federal Government of
the United States shrank to Washington, very much as the Eastern
Empire shrank to Byzantium, but Washington had none of the vitality
of Byzantium, and it was already a merely historical capital long
before the revival of tourism towards 2000.  Germany as a unity did
not survive the Polish wars, and Berlin dwindled rapidly to the
status of a group of villages amidst the ruins of the Polish aerial
bombardments.</p><p>The practical effacement of these bankrupt political systems in a
few years, the equally rapid drying up of general transport and
communications, the crescendo of the monetary breakdown, the speedy
degeneration of military organizations, threw back the tasks of
social order upon such local and regional leading as still existed.
They found themselves astonishingly called upon.  In Europe, as all
over the world throughout this extraordinary decade, towns, cities,
rural districts, discovered themselves obliged to "carry on" by
themselves.  The plague only drove home that imperative need.  The
municipal authorities organized such health services as they could
against the infection, or gave way to emergency bodies that took
things out of their hands.  When the plague disappeared, they were
like shipwrecked sailors on a strange island; they had to
reconstitute their shrunken economic life.  They used old authority
for new needs and old terms for new things.  Here it would be an
energetic leader who called himself the Mayor or the Duke, here a
resolute little band, self–styled the Town Council or the Citizens'
Union.  Here "advanced" terminology prevailed, and it was a "Soviet
of Workers" which took control.  In effect the latter would be very
similar to a Citizens' Union.  Its chief distinction was its
consciousness of being in a new social phase.</p><p>There was the most extraordinary variation in the political
structure of this phase of dislocation, and a flat contradiction
between the actual and the "legal" controls.  Across South Germany,
Poland and North France, the prevalent impression was one of social
revolution, and Soviets were in fashion.  But they were very
different in character from the original local Russian Soviets.  It
was possible to find a Communist district referring itself vaguely
to Moscow, lying side by side with another that was under the
control of its former owners and employers and professed to be, and
often was, still in communication with the national government in
the capital.  An uneasy truce would be maintained between these
theoretically antagonistic systems.  Deputations would go for
authority in various disputes—arrears of taxes in hand—to
Westminster, Paris or Rome, very much as the barbarian chiefs of
the Early Mediæval period would upon due occasion refer to
Byzantium or Rome.  Local conflicts and revolutions were constantly
occurring.  They were recognized at the capitals only as local
riots and municipal readjustments.</p><p>Scattered through this disarticulating Europe were the vestiges of
the old militarism, broken fragments of unpaid armies with
irreplaceable weapons and a dwindling supply of ammunition.  They
consisted of the officers who were soldiers by profession, and the
levies who had not been disbanded or who had refused to be
disbanded because there was no employment for them outside the
ranks.  These men had their officers very much under control
because of the great facilities for desertion.  In some cases these
shrivelled military forces were in contact with the capital and the
old legal government, and conducted, or attempted to conduct, tax
requisitions and suchlike surviving functions of the old order; in
other instances they became frankly brigand forces, though often
with high–sounding titles, Public Order Guards of the Emergency
Army.  Most merged with the local police of aggressive Mayors or
councils.  Small wars of conquest went on in the early Sixties.
Old empires and sovereign states reappeared, in duplicate or
triplicate, and vanished or became something else.  After 1960
there were even quasi–military forces levying contributions,
keeping a sort of order, and professing to be Modern State nuclei.
They would occupy the old barracks and accommodation of garrison
towns.</p><p>In the Forties these soldiers had been raw recruits.  In the
following decades those who remained in their old formations became
formidable middle–aged rascals in patched and shabby and
supplemented uniforms.  Some of the commandants had gained control
of local aerodromes and local munition factories, but everywhere
the military found themselves more and more out of sympathy with
the technical workers they needed to make these acquisitions
effective.  They degenerated to the level of the nineteenth century
infantry and were at last glad to get even a few thousand roughly
made cartridges to replenish their supply.</p><p>Under the necessity of doing things for themselves, people did
things for themselves that they had left to the central government
for a century.  Even during the World War, and in the year or so of
stress that followed it, various French Chambers of Commerce had
supplemented the deficiency in small change by local token
coinages.  Now this practice reappeared widely.  Today our museums
contain hundreds of thousands of specimens of these improvised
European coins of lead, nickel, tin and all sorts of alloys, jetons
or checks of wood, and tons of signed, printed paper notes, useful
in the local market, acceptable for rents and local taxes, but of
no avail at all at a distance of a few score miles.  The local bank
manager as often as not would improvise a local credit system in
cooperation with the local solicitor; the doctors would contrive a
way of getting along without the Home Office.  There were still
printers' establishments in most centres of population, and for
some years local periodicals, often of considerable originality,
appearing weekly or monthly and printed on the roughest and most
variable paper, supplied all that remained alive of the European
Press.  But their foreign news amounted to little more than rumour.
The great Press agencies were bankrupt and dead; the telegraph
organization was out of gear.</p><p>Save in a few exceptional centres, the diffusion of news by radio
died out completely.  The manufacture of receiving sets was
entirely disorganized.  From 1930 to 1970 the "ether" for all
except the special purposes of air transport was still.  There is a
long and interesting study in the Historical Record Series of the
vicissitudes of posts, telegraphs and telephones between 1950 and
1980.  There seem to have been extraordinary survivals.  Apparently
London, Paris and Rome were in telephonic communication almost
without a break, and the news of the great London landslide was
telephoned to Madrid and thence radioed to Buenos Ayres in 1968.
But that may have been a revival connected with the new Sea and Air
Control.</p><p>The disappearance not only of radio sets but of an enormous variety
of small conveniences and appliances was extraordinarily rapid
after the collapse of world trade.  Photography, for instance, was
wiped out almost at once.  The bicycle became rare, and the old
pneumatic tyre was replaced by a thin solid one of often very badly
adulterated "remade" rubber.  Electric lighting flickered out and
vanished for want of the proper material for filaments.  All
electrical material deteriorated, and tramway systems either fell
into complete disuse or returned to horse traction.</p><p>Ordinary life had been lowering its standards bit by bit from the
World War onward.  First one thing went and then another.  Neither
in the British nor the French provinces did the housing of the
common people recover from the cessation of building during the
actual warfare.  Except in places like Berlin or Vienna where there
had been a vigorous outbreak of post–war building which provided
accommodation in excess for the shrunken population, the mass of
Europeans were even more congested and dirty in their domestic
accommodation than they had been before the conflict, though indeed
they never sank to the immemorial squalor and poverty of the
Chinese and Indian towns.  Cleanliness diminished at such a pace as
to be noted even by the newspapers after 1933.  There are constant
complaints of the dirtiness of the streets and the bad repair of
the roads, and regretful comparisons with the trim orderliness of
twenty years before.</p><p>Clothing declined with housing.  The clothing trade shrank steadily
per head of population for nearly forty years.  The city crowds, in
spite of the more and more abundant uniforms (until 1950), lost
nearly all their former brightness and élan.  People patched up
their old clothing for want of new, and rags became increasingly
common.  The supply of boots was very restricted.  The mass
production of boots had been commandeered at the outbreak of the
war and was never turned back to commercial use because of the
complete financial ruin that ensued.  But the old–fashioned
shoemakers had been driven off the face of Europe long before by
this mass production, and so throughout the Famished Fifties the
Europeans were very painfully shod.  Spain had the best boots and
France and Britain took to sandals—and chilblains.  A certain
manufacture of footwear went on in some centre in Bohemia, now
untraceable, and next to Spain ranked Central Europe in the order
of shoe welfare.  There was an extreme scarcity of hats everywhere.</p><p>There was also a universal decline in the little comforts and
accessories of life to which the world had grown accustomed.
Except in a few favoured regions where it was actually grown,
tobacco disappeared.  The mass production of cigarettes died out,
and those who smoked, smoked pipes of substitute.  Real tea became
a great rarity, and sugar was scarce.  Dietetic diseases and
diseases of under–nutrition increased.</p><p>During the strain and effort of the Great War most of the Europeans
had already learnt something of contrivance and makeshift.  Now
they were to have a decade of domestic management under
difficulties.  The Germans were already familiar with the word
Ersatz; there was much technical knowledge and ability diffused
among them; and it is indisputable that they contrived to keep much
nearer comfort than the rest of the world during these dismal
years.  They devised substitute leather, substitute cotton,
substitute coffee and tea, substitute tobacco, substitute quinine
and opium, and a very respectable list of other substitute drugs.</p><p>At the other extreme were the shiftless Irish.  Until the return of
production their physical misery was very great indeed.  One
observer doubted if there were a million yards of new cloth
produced in that country between 1950 and 1960.  "They live," he
reported, "on buttermilk, potatoes, whisky and political
excitement.  They have contrived garments of woven straw, often
very picturesquely dyed, which they call Early Erse and of which
they boast inordinately, and they warm themselves by means of fires
of peat and dung and a great warmth of mutual invective."  This
sounds quite barbaric.  Yet it is to this period that we owe the
graceful—though, according to a recent Historical Documents
report, rather rickety—Church of the Atonement, built on the site
of the Dublin Royal College of Science after that had been
suppressed by the Censorship of 1939 for "teaching biology in a
manner tending to disintegrate the Holy Trinity".</p><p>The student must be more or less familiar with the representations
of this period in that useful compilation Historical Scenes in a
Hundred Volumes, and he has probably read a number of romances and
stories of this time.  Actual photographs are least abundant in the
later fifties and early sixties.  There were still plenty of
cameras in the world, but the supply of films seems to have died
out after 1955, and there are hardly any but slow wet–plate
exposures after that time for nearly ten years.  We get only a few
score of such animated snapshots as were abundant during the
preceding decades, and there are no European cinematograph films at
all.  Neither was there much sketching except of single figures,
and so the editors have had to supplement their material by very
carefully studied drawings and photographed restorations made at a
later date.</p><p>There are six interesting snapshots of scenes in Lyons in 1959.
Someone seems to have found a spool of film and been able to
develop it.  One shows the big central square, the Place Bellecour
as it was called, on a market day.  Earlier pictures show a big
bronze equestrian figure of Louis XIV, but this had already
disappeared, probably it had been melted for its metal; and the
windows of some of the big buildings, formerly hotels and
hospitals, in the background have the empty frameless look of
gutted houses.  But the scene is quite a busy one.  It was probably
the monthly market, and there is a considerable amount of cattle,
numerous horses being traded, hurdled sheep, many goats and a row
of pig–pens.  The people are mostly peasants wearing straw hats and
either very old coats or in some cases shawls wrapped about them.
Townspeople are still wearing the clothing of the 'thirties, shabby
and patched, and there are three market officials or magistrates in
the old–world top hat.  In the foreground a bearded man leads a
couple of oxen harnessed to a small "runabout" car in which a
corpulent woman sits in front with a crate of ducklings while
behind is a netted calf.  The lady smiles broadly at the camera,
unaware that she is smiling at posterity.</p><p>Another of these snapshots shows a bowls competition in the
deserted railway station.  It is clearly a festive occasion, and
several games are in progress.  The rails have disappeared from the
tracks, which have been levelled for the game, and the ponies and
mules of the players are tethered on the platform in a long line.
The doors of the various bureaus have been taken away but the
inscriptions Chef de Gare, Salle d'Attente, Restaurant, are still
faintly visible.  There are two long tables on one of the middle
platforms on which simple refreshments are being served.  A third
picture shows a crowd staring at the ruins of a row of houses which
have just collapsed down a steep slope in what is apparently the
district known as Fourvière.  Here two bearded men in the
unmistakable uniform of the old Alpini are keeping order.  We know
as a matter of fact that the Lyons municipality at that time had
three regiments of these soldiers quartered in barracks.  They are
wearing sandals supplemented by cloth strips that are twisted round
their legs, and their cloaks are in good condition.</p><p>Three others of these photographs give us a glimpse of the state of
affairs in a disused silk factory.  Up to the time of the economic
collapse, the silk manufactured at Lyons was still largely that
produced by the silkworm, but the supply of raw material seems to
have died out more or less completely in the Rhône valley, and the
shrinkage of trade and then the war diminished the importation of
the reeled–up thread.  But silk was needed in the manufacture of
shells, and probably there were special efforts to maintain the
supply up to the last.  This particular establishment seems to have
been carrying on a diminished output until the Lyons commune in
1951.  Then no doubt it was abruptly abandoned.  One photograph
shows a great heap of paper litter among weaving–machines and a
number of petrol cans.  Apparently there was an attempt to fire the
place.  Another gives a vista of winding–machines shrouded in
spiders' webs and fine dust.  In a third a wild cat crouches among
the spindles of a spinning–machine and spits at the unwanted
intruder.  The machinery has all the complicated clumsiness
characteristic of twentieth–century mechanism.  Apparently a window
of some sort was opened or a blind drawn back to make this
particular photograph, for the picture is blurred with a multitude
of whirling moths, most of them out of focus, evidently just
stirred up.</p><p>These particular pictures are valuable because of their
authenticity.  There are also two contemporary dry–plate pictures
of the Café Royal, the big restaurant of the Grand Hotel of
Stockholm, deserted and still intact.  They are oddly suggestive of
two pictures of the ruins of the Baths of Caracalla in Rome as they
appeared a hundred years earlier.  And there is also a photograph
of the remains of the old dining–room of the Hotel Métropole at
Brighton in England before it was undermined and fell into the sea.
But all the rest of the pictures given in Historical Scenes between
1955 and 1963 are arranged pictures.  The Transport organization
was running scores of aeroplanes and radio communications were
restored long before the complex manufacture of photographic
apparatus and material was set going again.</p><p>There are some very interesting restorations of conditions in
London showing the empty streets and the vacant tumbledown
warehouses of the city after the pestilence.  The pictures of the
corridors of the hotels in the Strand turned into hospital wards
are very impressive.  So too is the sketch of a great fight between
the cow–keepers and the potato–growers for the possession of Hyde
Park and Kensington Gardens in which three hundred people were
killed.  The dreadful pictures of the bodies of plague victims
floating down the Thames and accumulating in the Pool of London,
however, are now said to be exaggerated.</p><p>We try in the midst of our present securities to imagine the phases
of anxiety, loss, incredulity and reluctant acquiescence through
which the minds of hundreds of millions of Europeans passed, day by
day, from the general comfort of the Twenties, through the shocks,
fear, horror, rage and excitement of the war cycle, into this phase
of universal impotence and destitution.  The poor perhaps had a
less vivid apprehension of disaster than the rich.  Even in the
days of General Prosperity, as it is called, they had at the best
what we should consider very dull, drab, irksome lives.  Even
though they mostly ate sufficiently, they ate badly, and there was
never a stage of universal decent housing at any time for them.
They went from bad to worse.  They passed from toil to unemployment
and lethargy.  But the middling sort passed from good to bad, from
something one might almost consider tolerable living to the
hopeless neediness of the masses.</p><p>A class that went through great unhappiness everywhere during this
period was the class of elderly and "retired" persons and persons
of "independent means" (and no responsibilities) which had expanded
so enormously during the First Age of General Prosperity.  This
superfluity of prosperous humanity had spread itself out very
pleasantly over the world, oblivious of the exertions that
sustained social discipline and ensured its security.  Insensibly
it had taken the place of the old administrative and directive
noblesse and country gentry.  The investment system during its
period of steady efficiency had relieved this social stratum of
every bother.  There were great areas of agreeable country,
residential districts, given up to this "well–off" society, to its
gardens, which were often delightful, its golf–courses, race–
courses, mountain sport centres, parks, country clubs, plages, and
hotels.  It wilted a little during the World War, but revived again
very hopefully in the decade of hectic and uncertain expansion that
followed.  Then, as the Great Slump developed its grim phases, this
life of leisure passed away.</p><p>The Phase of Economy is really a misnomer.  There was really no
economy; there was strangulation and inaction through a cessation
of expenditure.  Nobody—unless it was a dexterous speculator on a
falling market—grew richer, or even relatively richer.  The only
profits appeared in bank balance sheets.  As the malady of arrest
spread, traffics declined, enterprise died out, borrowing states
and corporations suspended payments, and these children of good
fortune, these well–off people, found themselves confronted at the
same time by a suspension of payments and more and more urgent
charitable appeals.  Their bankers and solicitors informed them
that first this trusted prop and then that was in arrears or in
default.  The waters of repudiation rose, submerging security after
security.  If they sold out and hoarded, some fluctuation in
exchange might still engulf great fractions of their capital.
"Whatever else may be falling off, sleepless nights are on the
increase," a financial paper remarked in 1933.  The head full of
self–reproach that tossed on the crumpled pillow in the villa
marked time with the fretting of the unemployed who worried in the
stuffy cold of the slum.</p><p>We have the Diary of Titus Cobbett, who rode on a bicycle from Rome
and along the Riviera to Bordeaux in 1958.  He had begun life as an
art dealer, and had served the British Inland Revenue for some
years as a valuer of furniture, pictures and the like.  His tour
seems to have been a journey of curiosity.  He complains bitterly
of the difficulty of changing money between Genoa and Bordeaux.  He
seems to have had some obscure diplomatic or consular function, but
of that he is too discreet to speak.  Perhaps he was sent to make a
report, but if so there is no record of his instructions.</p><p>His description of that smitten coast is still very interesting
reading.  He had, as a young man with good connections, known Monte
Carlo well in the twenties, and the places he visited were often
those at which he had stayed as a guest.  He records the
abandonment of hundreds of lovely châteaux, locked–up, unsaleable,
abandoned, in the keeping perhaps of some old domestic, or frankly
looted by the people of the district, once delightful gardens whose
upkeep had become impossible, blind tangles of roses, oleanders,
pomegranates, oranges, cypresses, palm trees, agaves, cacti and
weeds; unremunerative hotels allowed to fall into ruins, broken–
down water–conduits washing away the roads, bungalows taken over by
the peasants.  Something of the same swift desolation must have
come upon the Campagna and the villadom of the Bay of Naples during
the ebb of Roman vitality, but this had been a swifter decline.
The roads, he says, were very variable, but a great number of the
road signs and roadside advertisements were still making their mute
appeal to a vanished traffic.  As he rode along wondering whether
he would find a reasonably clean and hospitable shelter for the
night, he read, he says, picked out in metallic knobs that answered
brightly to his oil lamp:</p><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>H  TEL  S  LEN  ID</p></blockquote></div><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>CU  SINE  RENOM</p></blockquote></div><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>T  T  LE  C  NFOR  M  RNE</p></blockquote></div><p>Whither had host and guests departed?  Where were the owners and
tenants of these villas and gardens; the bright clientele of the
pleasure resorts?  Many of them no doubt were already dead, for the
Riviera owners had been mostly middle–aged and oldish people.  The
rest were back in their own countries leading impoverished lives,
full of tiresome reminiscences, lost in the universal indigence.</p><p>Cobbett visited the ruins of the old Casino at Monte Carlo, and the
younger Sports Club.  The ceiling of the American Bar had fallen in
a few days before his visit.  "They looked small," he says.  "When
I was young they had seemed tremendous places."</p><p>The celebrated garden in which suicidal gamblers used to put an end
to their troubles was overgrown with mesembryanthemum.</p><p>Yet there was one exception to this general decadence, and our
observer stresses the significance of that.  Air traffic was still
going on.  Between Rome and Marseilles he notes very precisely that
he saw thirteen aeroplanes going east or west, besides two that he
heard before he got up in the morning.  "I doubt if I should have
seen so many twenty–five years ago," he writes, and goes on to
enlarge, very illuminatingly, on the revival of trade and the
possible revival of order these throbbing mechanisms portended.  At
Nice and at Marseilles he noted there was shipping—"not mere
fishing boats but ships of a thousand tons or more"; and at Nice
they were building a bigger ship—he estimated it as a three–
thousand tonner.  We have no other records of shipbuilding between
1947 and 1962.  Long before 1940 the building of very big ships had
ceased to be a "paying proposition" and it is fairly certain that
no sea–going ships whatever, big or little, were built anywhere in
the world in the early fifties.  Year by year the transport system
of the bankrupt planet had been sinking into disuse.  It is only
nowadays that our historical students are attempting to work out
statistical charts of that swift decadence.</p><p>Cobbett also notes with surprise and hope a stretch of railway
(operated by lever trolleys and a petrol engine or so) between the
port of Marseilles and some inland quarries.  He was clearly under
the impression that no railways were operating in the world any
longer.  So soon as the traffic had sunken to a level below the
possibility of paying subsistence wages, maintaining the permanent
way and meeting running expenses, it had been impossible even for
speculative buyers to handle these once valuable properties.  They
had become old junk on the landscape, tracks of torn and rusty
rails smothered in agaves and wild flowers.  He mentions the beauty
of the viaducts of the old Sud de France, and tells how he bicycled
along the footworn side–path of the Paris–Lyon–Méditerranée in
preference to the road.  The peasants had used the derelict railway
as a convenient iron–mine, and few rails remained.  Most of the
sleepers had been used for fuel.</p><p>At Fréjus there was an aerodrome, and here he describes a very
illuminating conversation with a Spanish–American aviator who had
served first with the Poles, then with the Germans, and finally
with the French during the warfare.  Cobbett was impressed by the
evident revival of trade, and surprised to find rubber, spices,
mercury and block–tin among the commodities coming by air from the
East, while clocks, watches, compasses, knives, needles, buttons,
hardened glass and the like were going back in exchange.  Most of
the trade was barter, and the profits were so considerable that
there seemed every reason to expect a steady expansion of the
service.</p><p>He seems to have learnt for the first time of the developing
combination of air–merchants who were mostly aviators surviving
from the war.  They had already organized a loose world union, it
seems, and were keeping the airways and air lights in order.</p><p>Cobbett remarked on the shipping revival he had noted.</p><p>"We shall have to watch that," said the aviator significantly.</p><p>"You take passengers?"</p><p>"When they can pay a passage."</p><p>"But this is civilization coming back!" cried Cobbett.</p><p>"Don't believe it!  It's a new civilization beginning."</p><p>And he seems to have opened Cobbett's eyes for the first time to
some of the ideas that were already taking shape in such brains as
his.  "World Empire?" he said.  "That's an old idea!  The men who
hold the air and the transport hold the world.  What do we want
with empires and that stuff any more?"</p><p>Cobbett was greatly impressed by this conversation.  He went on
across France to Bordeaux, where it seems some sort of money
awaited him, thinking this over and jotting down his thoughts.  He
makes one sound and interesting parallel between this new World
Transport Organization and those Hansa Merchants who played such an
important rôle in the revival of civilization about the Baltic and
North Europe generally after the Roman collapse.  "After all,"
reflects Cobbett, "we have never given organized transport and
trading its proper importance in history."</p><p>At Bordeaux he sold his bicycle and was able to get a passage in an
aeroplane to Le Bourget (an aerodrome of old origin near the ruins
of Paris) and thence to fly to Hendon.  His 'plane landed at Le
Mans for an exchange of goods.  His delight to escape from the
rough roads he had been riding is infectious.</p><p>He describes the recovery of the devastated French forests in the
form of scrub, and he peered down at the little peasants' clearings
that were appearing in groups and patches round the old towns.  He
sees the aviators and mechanics at the aerodromes with new eyes,
and he learns from them of the way in which World Transport was
picking up and reinstating metallurgical and electrical works.  He
has an eye for the beauty of Le Mans cathedral, which he had seen
and admired in his student days, and which he rejoices to find
intact, and he describes that early monument to the pioneers of
aviation in the Place below which still survives.  Amiens cathedral
also was uninjured at that time.</p><p>His diary ends on a melancholy note.  Apparently he had not visited
England for some years, and he is shocked by the ruinous desolation
of the outer suburbs of London.  Plainly he had lived in and loved
London as a boy.  A part of Hyde Park, in spite of the opposition
of the squatter cultivators, had been converted into an aerodrome,
but he found the rebuilding of the central region haphazard and
unpleasing.  He objects to the crowding of heavy buildings, with
their vast anti–aircraft carapaces of cement, at the centre, due to
the decay of suburban traffic facilities.  It looked, he says, like
a cluster of "diseased" mushrooms.  "When shall we English learn to
plan?" he asks, and then with an odd prophetic gleam he doubts
whether the northern slope of the Thames depression, so ill drained
and so soft in its subsoil, can carry this lumpish mass of unsound
new buildings to which the life of the old city was shrinking.</p><p>Only ten years later his fears were to be justified.  The bed of
the Thames buckled up and the whole of the Strand, Fleet Street,
Cornhill and, most regrettable of all, the beautiful St. Paul's
Cathedral of Sir Christopher Wren, so familiar to us in the
pictures and photographs of that age, collapsed in ruin and
perished in flame.  The reader who has pored over Historical Scenes
in a Hundred Volumes,—and what child has not?—will remember the
peculiar appearance of the old Waterloo Bridge, crumpled up to a
pent–house shape, and the grotesque obliquity of the Egyptian
obelisk, once known as Cleopatra's Needle, that venerable slab of
hieroglyphics, cracked and splintered by air–raid shrapnel, which
slanted incredibly for some years before it fell into the banked–up
water of the Lambeth–Chelsea lake.</p></section><footer/></body></html>