<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>2: The Sloughing of the Old Educational Tradition</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch02s01.xhtml" title="1: The London Conference: The Crowning Failure of the Old Governments; the Spread of Dictatorships and Fascisms"/><link rel="next" href="ch02s03.xhtml" title="3: Disintegration and Crystallization in the Social Magma. the Gangster and Militant Political Organizations"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="2: The Sloughing of the Old Educational Tradition" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646647360"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">2: The Sloughing of the Old Educational Tradition</h2></div></div></div><p>Faber in his interesting and suggestive Historical Analyses (2103)
discusses how far the wars, depressions, pestilences, phases of
semi–famine and periods of actual starvation, in the hundred years
before 2014, were necessary, and how far, with the resources then
available, they might have been avoided by mankind.  He takes the
view that the encumbrance of tradition was so great that for all
that period this martyrdom of our kind was inevitable.  He argues
that without the sufferings of these generations men's minds could
never have been sufficiently purged of their obstinate loyalties,
jealousies, fears and superstitions; men's wills never roused to
the efforts, disciplines and sacrifices that were demanded for the
establishment of the Modern State.</p><p>Faber applies his criticism more particularly to this so–called
decadence of education after (circa) 1930.  It has hitherto been
usual to treat the ebb of school–building and schooling that took
place then as a real retrogression, to rank it with the fall in the
general standard of life and the deterioration of public health.
But he advanced some excellent reasons for supposing that, so far
from being an evil, the starvation and obliteration of the old–
world teaching machinery was a necessary preliminary to social
recovery.</p><p>The common school, he insists, had to be born again, had to be
remade fundamentally.  And before that could happen it had to be
broken up and wellnigh destroyed.  He sweeps aside almost
contemptuously the claim that the nineteenth century was an
educational century.  We are misled, he argues, by a mere
resemblance between the schools and universities of the past and
the schools and post–school education of the modern period.  Both
occupy the time of the young, and we do not sufficiently appreciate
the fact that what they are doing with the young is something
entirely different.  Our education is an introduction to the
continual revolutionary advance of life.  But education before the
twenty–first century was essentially a conservative process.  It
was so rigorously and completely traditional that its extensive
disorganization was an inevitable preliminary to the foundation of
a new world.</p><p>The word education has come now to cover almost all intellectual
activities throughout life except research and artistic creation.
That was not its original meaning.  It meant originally the
preparation of the young for life.  It did not go on even in
extreme cases beyond three or four and twenty, and usually it was
over by fourteen!  But we draw no line at any age, as our ancestors
did, when learning ceases.  The general information of the public,
public discussion and collective decisions, all fall within the
scope of our educational directorate.  All that was outside what
passed for education in the early Twentieth Century.</p><p>What people knew in those days they knew in the most haphazard way.
The privately owned newspapers of the period told the public what
their readers or their proprietors desired; the diffusion of facts
and ideas by the early cinema, the sound radio and so on was
entirely commercialized for the advertisement of goods in America,
and controlled and directed in the interests of influential
politicians in Great Britain; book–publishing, even the publication
of scientific works, was mainly speculative and competitive, and
there was no such thing as a Centre of Knowledge in the world.</p><p>It is remarkable to note how long mankind was able to carry on
without any knowledge organization whatever.  No encyclopædia, not
even a bookseller's encyclopædia, had existed before the
seventeenth century, for the so–called Chinese Encyclopædia was a
literary miscellany, and there was no permanent organization of
record even on the part of such mercenary encyclopædias as came
into existence after that date.  Nor was there any conception of
the need of a permanent system of ordered knowledge, continually
revised until the twentieth century was nearing its end.  To the
people of the Age of Frustration our interlocking research,
digest, discussion, verification, notification and informative
organizations, our Fundamental Knowledge System, that is, with its
special stations everywhere, its regional bureaus, its central city
at Barcelona, its seventeen million active workers and its five
million correspondents and reserve enquirers, would have seemed
incredibly vast.  It would have seemed incredibly vast to them in
spite of the fact that the entirely unproductive armies and
military establishments they sustained in those days of universal
poverty were practically as huge.</p><p>We are still enlarging this Brain of Mankind, still increasing its
cells, extending its records and making its interactions more rapid
and effective.  A vast independent literature flourishes beside it.
Compared with today our species in the Age of Frustration was as a
whole brainless: it was collectively invertebrate with a few
scattered ill–connected ganglia; it was lethargically ignorant; it
had still to develop beyond the crude rudiments of any coordinated
knowledge at all.</p><p>But not only was general knowledge rudimentary, casual, erroneous
and bad.  Faber's case against the old education is worse than
that.  Knowledge was explicitly outside education, outside formal
schooling altogether.  The need for a sound common ideology is a
Modern State idea.  The old, so called "Elementary" schools, Faber
shows, did not pretend to give knowledge.  So far as directive
ideas were concerned, they disavowed this intention.  He quotes a
very revealing contemporary survey of the situation in America by
Dr. G. S. Counts (The American Road to Culture, 1930) in which the
complete ideological sterilization of the common schools of the
Republic is demonstrated beyond question.  The sterilization was
deliberate.  So far as the giving of comprehensive information
about life went, says Faber, there was absolutely nothing valuable
destroyed during this period of educational collapse because
nothing valuable had as yet got into the curricula.  The history
taught in these popular schools was pernicious patriotic twaddle;
the biology, non–existent or prudish and childish—the "facts of
sex", as they were called, were for example TAUGHT by dissecting
flowers—and there was no economic instruction whatever.  The
nineteenth–century "education" was not enlightenment; it was anti–
enlightenment.  Parents, political and religious organizations
watched jealously that this should be so.  He quotes school time–
tables and public discussions and gives samples of the textbooks in
use.</p><p>The decline in scientific research, moreover, during this age of
systole, Faber insists, has been greatly exaggerated.  Although
there was certainly a considerable diminution in the number of
actual workers through the destruction of private endowments and
what was called "economy", and although there was also a
considerable interference with the international exchange of ideas
and a slacking down in pace at which ideas grew, there was no
absolute interruption in the advance of ordered science even
through the worst phases of the social breakdown.  Research
displayed a protean adaptability and indestructibility.  It shifted
from the patronage of the millionaire to the patronage of the war
lord; it took refuge in Russia, Spain and South America; it betook
itself to the aeroplane hangars, to rise again in due time to its
present world–predominance.  It had never been pampered under the
régime of private capitalism.  All through that First Age of
Prosperity pure research had lived from hand to mouth.  As soon as
it paid, says Sinclair Lewis in Martin Arrowsmith, it was
commercialized and it degenerated.  When the bad times came the
parasites of science fell away, but the genuine scientific worker,
accustomed to scanty supplies, tightened his belt a little more and
in all sorts of out–of–the–way places stuck to his job.</p><p>What really did break up in this period between 1930 and 1950 was a
systematic schooling of the masses which had developed steadily
during the nineteenth century.  Beyond the elements of reading,
speech and counting, this was no more and no less than a drilling
in tradition.  There had been some reforms, more particularly in
method, some advance in the teaching of infants (though this was
sacrificed early in the economy flurry), and a few exceptional
schools emerged, but this was the character of the typical school
of the time.  A progressive multiplication of this kind of school
had indeed gone on in nearly every country in the world even up to
the outbreak of the Great War.  The proportion of "literates" who
could at least read increased steadily.  After that the rate of
advance (except in Russia after 1917, where popular teaching was
only beginning) fell stage by stage to zero.  But what was ebbing
was not really knowledge or instruction at all, but a training in
the binding traditions of the old society.</p><p>The story of what used to be called "the conflict between religion
and science" belongs mainly to the history of the nineteenth
century, and we will not tell again here how the fairly stable
structure of Christian belief and disciplines was weakened by the
changes in values that ensued from the revelation of geological and
biological horizons in that period.  Before 1850 more than ninety–
nine per cent of the population of Europe and America believed
unquestioningly that the universe had been created in the year 4004
B.C.  Their intellectual lives were all cramped to the dimensions
of that petty cellule of time.  It was rather frightening for them
to break out.  They succumbed to mental agoraphobia.  The student
knows already of the difficulties experienced by the Christian
ministry during those years of mental release and expansion in
"symbolizing" the Fall and Atonement, which had hitherto been
taught as historical facts, and of the loss of confidence and
authority that came through this unavoidable ambiguity.  The
ensuing controversies thundered and died away into mutterings and
ironies, but the consequences of these disputes became more and
more evident in the succeeding generations.  They evinced
themselves in a universal moral indefiniteness.  The new and old
cancelled out.</p><p>The accepted Christian world outlook, both that prescribed by the
Catholic Church and that of the various dissentient Protestant
sects, had carried with it a coarse but fairly effective moral
imperative.  Hell was the ultima ratio of good behaviour.  The
Churches, although badly damaged in argument, were well endowed and
powerfully entrenched in the educational organization.  Their
practical resistance to the new views proved to be more effective
than their controversial efforts.  People had the social habit of
belonging to them and entrusting their children to them.  There
were no other teachers ready; no other schools.  So the traditional
orthodoxies were able to obstruct the development of a modern ethic
in harmony with the new realizations of man's place in space and
time, in spite of the loss of much of their former power of
unquestionable conviction.</p><p>Gradually throughout the First Age of General Prosperity the
relative value of their endowments diminished, and they lost
intellectual and moral prestige.  But it was only with the economic
landslides of the post–war period that their material foundations
gave way completely.  For a time these great organizations share in
the common disaster, and when at last under new auspices a
restoration of production occurred they recovered nothing of their
proportional importance.  Their old investments had vanished.  They
suffered with other landlords in the general resumption of estates
by the community.  By 1965 C.E. it was no longer possible for an
ordinary young man to get a living as a minister of any Church.
Holy orders, since they implied an old–world outlook, were also a
grave encumbrance for an ambitious teacher.  It was extraordinary
with what facility the priests and parsons changed their collars
and vanished into the crowd with the progressive disappearance of
their endowments.  The organized Christian Churches pass out of
history at last almost as quickly as the priesthood of Baal
vanished after the Persian conquest.  There is considerable
plausibility in Faber's contention that they could have disappeared
in no other way.</p><p>It had been usual to treat the extensive destruction of social
morale which characterized this period as due to the interregnum
between the fading out of the Christian ethic and the moral and
intellectual establishment of modern conduct.  Faber questions that
boldly.  He admits that the morale of Western civilization was
built up very largely by Christian agencies, but he denies that
they were sustaining it.  He ascribes its evaporation almost
entirely to the destruction of social confidence which we have
noted already as a natural consequence of the wild fluctuations of
economic security and monetary values at that time.  Men ceased to
respect society because they felt they were being cheated and
betrayed by society.</p></section><footer/></body></html>