<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>1: The London Conference: The Crowning Failure of the Old Governments; the Spread of Dictatorships and Fascisms</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch02.xhtml" title="Book the Second"/><link rel="next" href="ch02s02.xhtml" title="2: The Sloughing of the Old Educational Tradition"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="1: The London Conference: The Crowning Failure of the Old Governments; the Spread of Dictatorships and Fascisms" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646637140"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">1: The London Conference: The Crowning Failure of the Old Governments; the Spread of Dictatorships and Fascisms</h2></div></div></div><p>In the preceding chapters we have explained how the old order of
the nineteenth century, the Capitalist System as it was called,
came to disaster in the second and third decades of the twentieth
century because of the disproportionate development of its
industrial production, the unsoundness and vulnerability of its
monetary nexus, and its political inadaptability.  It had no
inherent power of recovery, and there was no idea of a new order,
sufficiently developed, to replace it.  Necessarily therefore the
tale of disaster went on.</p><p>The only mechanisms in existence for collective action, and that
only in disconnected spurts, were the various sovereign
governments.  Most of these at the outset of the war were either
parliamentary monarchies or parliamentary republics.  The
parliaments were elected upon a very preposterous system by the
bulk or all of the population.  The age was called the Age of
Democracy.  Democracy did not mean then what it means now, an equal
opportunity for every human being according to his ability and the
faculty to which he belongs, to serve and have a voice in
collective affairs.  Nor did it mean the fraternal equality of a
small community.  It expressed a political fiction of a very
extraordinary kind: that every subject of the contemporary state
was equally capable of making whatever collective decisions had to
be made.</p><p>The great republics of a remoter antiquity, the Carthaginian,
the Athenian, the Roman, for example, were all essentially
aristocratic.  Democratic republics, that is to say republics in
which every man was supposed to share equally in the government, in
the rare instances when they occurred at all before the end of the
eighteenth century, were, like, Uri, Unterwalden or Andorra, small
and poor and perched in inaccessible places.  The world at large
knew nothing of them.  Their affairs were equally small and well
within the scope of a common citizen's understanding.</p><p>Then with the Era of European Predominance came a turning–point in
human affairs, that outbreak of books and discussion in the
fifteenth century, a period of great animation and confusion when
the destructive criticism of faiths and loyalties got loose.  The
release of new economic forces strained the old feudal order to
breaking.  Exploration and merchandising, new financial conditions,
industrial development, created new types of men, uncertain of
their powers, needing and demanding free play.  They did not know
clearly what they wanted; they did not know clearly how they
differed from the men of the old order, nor had they any conception
that such a structural reform of human relations as Plato had
already pictured nearly two thousand years before them.  His plan
for a devoted and trained order of rulers was unknown to them,
though More had tried to revive it.  They were simply responding to
the facts about them.  They chafed under an hereditary aristocracy,
and they distrusted an absolute king.</p><p>Essentially the movement that evolved the phraseology of
nineteenth–century democracy was a revolt against "birth" and
"privilege", against the monopolization of direction and advantages
by restricted and generally hereditary classes in accordance with
definitely established dogmas.  Because this revolt was the revolt
of a very miscellaneous number of energetic and resentful
individuals not definitely organized, mentally or socially, it came
about that at a quite early stage of the new movement it took the
form of an assertion of the equal political rights of all men.</p><p>It was not that these sixteenth and seventeenth–century Radicals
were for government by the general mass; it was that they were
antagonistic to established classes and rulers.  They constituted a
vigorous insurgent minority rousing, so far as it could, and
trailing after it the apathetic majority of submissive mankind.
That was always the character of these democratic movements of the
Age of European Predominance.  The multitude was supposed to be
demanding and deciding—and all the time it was being pushed or
led.  The individuality of the popular "leaders" of those centuries
stands out far more vividly than the kings and ecclesiastics of the
period.  Only one or two such hereditary monarchs as William
Prince of Orange, or Frederick the Great of Prussia, figure as
conspicuously on the record as—to cite a miscellany of new types—
Cromwell, Voltaire, Mirabeau, Washington, Gladstone, Robespierre,
Bonaparte or Marx.</p><p>Later on (in England, America, Scandinavia, Germany, Finland, e.g.)
in just the same way a minority of dissatisfied and aggressive
women struggling for a rôle in affairs inflicted the vote upon the
indifferent majority of women.  But their achievement ended with
that.  Outside that sexual vindication, women at that time had
little to contribute to the solution of the world's problems, and
as a matter of fact they contributed nothing.</p><p>Research in social psychology is still only beginning to unravel
the obscure processes by which faith in "democracy" became for the
better part of a century the ruling cant of practically all America
and the greater part of Europe.  There was often a profound
internal disingenuousness even in those who were known as
"Thinkers" in that age.  They were afraid in their hearts of stark
realities; they tried instinctively to adapt even their heresies to
what seemed to them invincibly established prejudices.  Their
primary conception of democracy was of some far–away simple little
republic of stout upstanding men, all similar, all practically
equal in fortune and power, managing the affairs of the canton in a
folk–meeting, by frank speech and acclamation.  All the old–world
democracies, up to and including the Republic of Rome, were ruled,
in theory at least, by such meetings of all the citizens.  The
people, it was imagined, watched, listened, spoke, and wisdom
ensued.</p><p>The extension of this ideal to the large communities of the new
world that was replacing the feudal order, involved such manifest
difficulties and even such absurdities that mysticism was
inevitable if the people was still to be supposed the sovereign of
the community.  But there was so strong and widespread a dread that
if this supposition was not maintained privilege, restriction,
tyranny would come back that the mystical interpretation was boldly
adopted.  At any cost those old inequalities must not return, said
the adventurers of the dawning capitalist age, and, flying from one
subjugation, they hurried on to another.</p><p>They found the doctrine of man's natural virtue as expounded by
Rousseau extraordinarily helpful and effective.  The common man,
when he is not beguiled by Priest or King, is always right.  The
Common People became therefore a mystical sympathetic being,
essentially a God, whose altar was the hustings and whose oracle
the ballot box.  A little slow and lumpish was this God of the Age
of European Predominance, but, though his mills ground slowly, men
were assured that they ground with ultimate exactitude.  And
meanwhile business could be carried on.  You could fool some of the
people all the time and all the people some of the time, said
Abraham Lincoln, but you could not fool all the people all the
time.  Yet for such crucial purposes as bringing about a war or
exploiting an economic situation, this was manifestly a quite
disastrous degree of foolability.</p><p>And the situation naturally evolved a Press of the very highest
fooling capacity.</p><p>This belatedly inevitable Divinity proved now to be altogether too
slow–witted for the urgent political and economic riddles, with
ruin and death at hand, which pressed upon our race as the
twentieth century unfolded.  The experience of the futile
Disarmament and Economic Conferences of 1932 and 1933, the massive
resistance in every national legislature to any but the most narrow
egotism in foreign policy, the inability of the world as a whole to
establish any unanimity of action in face of swift economic
collapse, revealed the final bankruptcy of Parliamentary Democracy.</p><p>The inability of the world's nominal rulers to shake off their
lifelong habit of speaking to, or at, a vaguely conceived crowd of
prejudiced voters, and their invincible repugnance from clear
statement, frustrated every effort towards realism.  They recoiled
from any suggestion of definitive or novel action on the plea
that their function was purely representative.  Behind them all
the reader feels the sprawling uneasy presence of that poor
invertebrate mass deity of theirs, the Voter, easily roused to
panic and frantic action against novel, bold or radical measures,
very amenable to patriotic claptrap, very easily scared and
maddened into war, and just as easily baffled to distrust and
impotence by delays, side issues, and attacks on the personalities
of decisive people he might otherwise have trusted.  An entirely
irresponsible Press, mercenary or partisan, played upon his baser
emotions, which were so easy to play upon, and made no appeal
whatever to his intelligence or his conscience.</p><p>The Voter, the Mass, which was neither educated nor led, the Voter
without any sincere organizations of leadership anywhere, is the
basal explanation of the impotence of those culminating
conferences.  The World Economic Conference in London was by far
the more significant of the two.  Armament and disarmament are
symptoms and superficial, but economic life is fundamental.  This
London gathering has been made the subject of a thousand studies by
our social psychologists.  Many of its contradictions still perplex
us profoundly.  The men who assembled had just as good brains as
anyone to–day, and, as an exhaustive analysis by Moreton Canby of
the various projects advanced at the Conference proves, they had a
substantial understanding of the needs of the world situation, yet
collectively, and because of their haunting paralysing sense of the
Mass and Press behind them and of their incalculable impulses and
resentments, they achieved an effect of fatuity far beyond the
pompous blunderings of Versailles.</p><p>Primarily the London Conference was a belated effort to repair the
vast omissions of that earlier gathering, to supplement the well–
meaning political patchwork of Wilson by some readjustment of the
monetary and economic dislocations he had been too limited to
foresee or too weak to avoid.  Wraithlike conceptions of some vague
monetary League of Nations at Bâle, and some Tariff Council and
Assembly, drifted through the mists of the opening meeting.  And
History, with its disposition to inexact repetition made one of the
principal figures of this second world assembly also a President of
the United States, belonging also to the Democratic Party and
according to the ritual of that Party invoking the name of
Jefferson as the Communists invoked the name of Marx or the Moslim,
Mahomet.  This was Roosevelt II.  He leaves a less vivid impression
than his predecessor because he did not impend for so long upon the
European scene.  But for some months at least before and after his
election as American President and the holding of the London
Conference there was again a whispering hope in the world that a
real "Man" had arisen, who would see simply and clearly, who would
speak plainly to all mankind and liberate the world from the dire
obsessions and ineptitudes under which it suffered and to which it
seemed magically enslaved.  But the one thing he failed to do was
to speak plainly.</p><p>Drawing wisdom from Wilson's personal failure, he did not come to
London and expose himself and his conversation to too close a
scrutiny.  He preferred to deal with the fluctuating crises in
London from his yacht, Amberjack II, in Nantucket Harbour, through
intermittent messages and through more or less completely
authorized intermediaries.  Amberjack II has become almost as
significant a ship in the history of human affairs as the Ford
Peace Ship.  Significant equally in its intentions and in its
inadequacies.</p><p>Everywhere as the Conference drew near men were enquiring about
this possible new leader for them.  "Is this at last the Messiah we
seek, or shall we look for another?"  Every bookshop in Europe
proffered his newly published book of utterances, Looking Forward,
to gauge what manner of mind they had to deal with.  It proved
rather disconcerting reading for their anxious minds.  Plainly the
man was firm, honest and amiable, as the frontispiece portrait with
its clear frank eyes and large resolute face showed, but the text
of the book was a politician's text, saturated indeed with good
will, seasoned with much vague modernity, but vague and wanting in
intellectual grip.  "He's good," they said, "but is this good
enough?"</p><p>Nevertheless hope fought a stout fight.  There was no other
personality visible who even promised to exorcize the spell that
lay upon the economic life of the race.  It was Roosevelt's
Conference or nothing.  And in spite of that disappointing book
there remained some sound reasons for hope.  In particular the
President, it was asserted, had a "Brain Trust".  A number of
indisputably able and modern–minded men were his associates, such
men as Professors Tugwell, Moley and Dickinson, men whose later
work played a significant part in that reconstruction of legal and
political method which was America's particular contribution to
Modern State ideas.  This "last hope of mankind", it was credibly
reported, called these intimates by their Christian names and they
called him "Guv'nor."  He was said to have the modesty and
greatness to defer to their studied and matured opinions.
Observers, still hopeful, felt that if he listened to these
advisors things might not go so badly after all.  He was at any
rate one point better than the European politicians and heads of
States who listened only to bankers and big–business men.</p><p>But was he listening?  Did he grasp the threefold nature of the
problem in hand?  He understood, it seemed, the need for monetary
inflation to reduce the burthen of debt and over–capitalization; he
was apparently alive to the need for a progressive expansion of
public employment; and so far he was sound.  Unless, which is not
quite clear, he wavered between "public" and "publicly assisted",
which was quite another matter.  But was he sound upon the
necessity that these measures should be world–wide or practically
world–wide?  He made some unexpected changes of attitude in these
respects.  Were these changes inconstancies or were they tactical
manoeuvres veiling a profoundly consistent and resolute purpose?
Was it wise to be tactical when all the world was in need of plain
speech and simple directive ideas?  His treatment took on a
disconcertingly various quality.  He listened, it seemed, to his
advisors; but was he not also listening to everybody?  He was
flirting with bimetallism.  No medicine, it seemed, was to be
spared.</p><p>The Conference opened with a stout determination to be brilliant
and eventful; the hotels were full, the streets beflagged, the
programme of entertainments was admirable, and even the English
weather seemed to make an effort.  The opening addresses by the
King of England and his Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald make very
curious reading to–day.  They express an acute recognition of the
crucial condition of human affairs.  They state in so many words
that the failure of the Conference will precipitate world disaster.
They insist upon the necessity for world cooperation, for monetary
simplification and a resumption of employment; and in all that we
admit they had the truth of the matter.  But they make not the
faintest intimation of how these desirable ends are to be obtained.
They made gestures that are incomprehensible to us unless they had
an inkling of the primary elements of the situation.  And then
immediately they turned away to other things.  That mixture of
resolve and failure to attack is what perplexes us most.  If they
saw the main essentials of the situation they certainly did not see
them as a connected whole; they did not see any line of world
action before them.</p><p>Cordell Hull, the chief of the United States delegation, was
equally large and fine.  The grave and splendid words—shot with
piety in the best American tradition—that he inscribed upon the
roll of history were as follows:  "Selfishness must be banished.
If—which God forbid!—any nation should wreck this Conference,
with the notion that its local interests might profit, that nation
would merit the execration of mankind."</p><p>Again Daladier, the French Prime Minister, opened with extremely
broad and sane admissions.  He insisted strongly on a necessity
which the two opening English speeches had minimized, the
necessity, the urgent necessity, for a progressive development of
great public works throughout the world to absorb the unemployed
and restore consumption.  The Americans in the second week seemed
to be coming in line with that.  But after this much of lucidity
the Conference fell away to minor issues.  Apparently it could not
keep at so high a level of reality.  The pressure of the Mass and
the Press behind each delegate began to tell upon him.  The
national representatives began to insist with increasing
explicitness that national interests must not be sacrificed to the
general good, and in a little time it became doubtful if there
could be such a thing as the general good.  The World Economic
Conference became by imperceptible transitions a World Economic
Conflict just as the League of Nations had become a diplomatic
bargain mart.  All the fine preluding of the first séances withered
to fruitlessness because the mind of the world had still to realize
the immense moral and educational effort demanded by those triple
conditions that were dawning upon its apprehension, and because
it was still unwilling to accept the immense political pooling
they indicated.  The amount of self–abnegation involved was
an insurmountable psychological barrier in the way of the
representatives present.  It would have meant a sacrifice of the
very conditions that had made them.  How could men appointed as
national representatives accept a pooling of national interests?
They were indeed fully prepared to revolutionize the world
situation and change gathering misery to hope, plenty and order,
but only on the impossible condition that they were not to change
themselves and that nothing essential to their importance changed.
The leading ideas of the Conference were cloudily true, but the
disintegrative forces of personal, party and national egotism were
too strong for them.</p><p>It is a very curious thing that the representatives of Soviet
Russia did nothing to enlighten the obscurity of the world riddle.
It is still argued by many writers that the Bolshevik régime was
the direct precursor of our Modern World–State as it exists to–day.
But there was no direct continuity.  The Modern State arose indeed
out of the same social imperatives and the same constructive
impulses that begot Marxism and Leninism, but as an independent,
maturer, and sounder revolutionary conception.  The Soviet system
certainly anticipated many of the features of our present order in
its profession of internationalism, in its very real socialism, and
particularly in the presence of a devoted controlling organization,
the Communist Party, which foreshadowed our Modern State
Fellowship.  But there was always a wide divergence in Russia
between theory and practice, and Litvinoff, who spoke on behalf of
that first great experiment in planning, was too preoccupied with
various particular points at issue between his country and the
western world, trading embargoes and difficulties of credit, for
example, to use the occasion as he might have done, for a world–
wide appeal.  He did nothing to apply the guiding principles of
Communism to the world situation.  Here was a supreme need for
planning, but he said nothing for a Five Year or Ten Year Plan for
all the world.  Here was a situation asking plainly for collective
employment, and he did not even press the inevitability of world–
socialism.  Apparently he had forgotten the world considered as a
whole as completely as any of the capitalist delegates.  He was
thinking of Russia versus the other States of the world as simply
as if he were an ordinary capitalist patriot.</p><p>The claims of the other delegations were even more shortsighted and
uninspired.  Since there was a time–limit set to their speeches,
they compressed their assertions of general humanitarian
benevolence to a phrase or so and then came to business.  Only
Senator Connolly, from the Irish Free State, protested against the
blinkered outlooks of his fellow speakers and pleaded for a
consideration of "every possible theory, however unorthodox."  But
his own speech propounded no substantial constructive ideas.  He
was too obsessed by an embargo that England had put upon Irish
exports, and to that he settled down….</p><p>The whole idea of the Modern World–State, Moreton Canby insists, is
to be traced, albeit in a warped and sterilized form, alike in the
expressed idea–systems of the Americans, the British, the French
and the Russians at the Conference.  In the American statements it
is wrapped about and hidden by individualist phrases and
precautions, in the British it is overlaid by imperialist
assumptions, in the Russian it is made unpalatable by the false
psychology and harsh jargon of Marxism.  In the first the business
man refuses to change and get out of the way, in the second the
imperialist administrator, and in the third the doctrinaire party
man.  Athwart every assertion of general principles drive the misty
emotions of patriotism, party and personal association.  Yet for
all that it is indisputable that the Modern World–State was
definitely adumbrated at London in 1933.  Like a ghost out of the
future its presence was felt by nearly everyone, though the worst
phases of the Age of Frustration had still to come, though
generations of suffering had still to lapse, before it could appear
as the living reality of human political life.</p><p>The ghost, says Canby, did not materialise because there was no
material.  Every large country in the world was feeling its way
towards the essentials of a permanently progressive world–state
but none was yet within reach even of its partial and local
realisation.  Roosevelt II and his eleventh hour effort to
reconstruct America, he finds particularly interesting.  The
President was clearly aware of the need to relieve debt by
inflation, but he was unable to check the dissipation of the
liberated energy in speculation.  He was dealing with men, trained
and saturated in the tradition of poker, to whom a solemn cunning
had become a second nature, and he was asking them (with occasional
fierce threats) to display an open–faced helpfulness.  He had no
proper civil service available to control large public works; it
was impossible to change the American technicians at one blow from
quasi–financial operators to a candid, devoted public salariat.  So
he tried to induce profiteers to forego profits and organise their
industries on altruistic lines by dire threats of socialisation
which he had no managing class to enforce.  And he was as ignorant
of British or European mentality and as little able to get to an
understanding with it as Wilson had been before him.  It was a
mutual misunderstanding, but his manners were self–righteous and
provocative.  He began to scold long before the Conference was
over.  By 1935 everyone was pointing to a sort of contrasted
parallelism between America and Russia.  Each was manifestly
struggling towards a more scientifically organised state, and each
was finding the same difficulty in reconciling productive
efficiency in the general interest with primarily political
control.  Technician and politician had still to be assimilated one
to the other.  Each great dictatorship was at war with the
speculator and the profiteer.  Each professed a faint hope of
cosmopolitan cooperation and then concentrated practically and
urgently upon the establishment of an internal prosperity.  But
they started towards that common objective from opposite poles of
productive efficiency and social assumption.  Roosevelt started
from the standpoint of democratic individualism and Stalin from
that of Marxist communism.  The British system and the other
intermediate countries of the world struggled to be conservative in
the chaos of financial collapse.  No solvent had yet been devised
to synthesise the good will in the world.</p><p>The London Conference rose to no such dramatic climax as the
signing of the Peace Treaty at Versailles.  It rose to nothing.  It
began at its highest point and steadily declined.  If Versailles
produced a monster, London produced nothing at all.  Never did so
valiant a beginning peter out so completely.</p><p>There are abundant intimations in the Press of the time (see
Habwright's The Sense of Catastrophe in the Nineteen Thirties, a
summary of quotations in the Historical Documents Series 173,192)
of a realization that the political and economic morale of that age
was played out, and that almost any casual selection of men would
have been at least as adequate as this gathering of old–world
political personages to face the vast impending disasters before
our race.  For at any rate these men had already been tried and
tested and found wanting.  Mr. Ramsay MacDonald indeed, the British
premier, the fine flower and summary of professional politics,
rolled his r's and his eyes over the Conference and seemed still to
be hoping that some favourable accident out of the void might save
him and his like from the damning dissection of history.  For a
time, in the opening glow of the assembly, with the clicking
photographers recording every studied gesture, with the attentive
microphones spreading out and pickling for ever his fine voice and
his rich accent, with bustling secretaries in sedulous attendance,
with the well–trained gravity of the delegates and particularly the
well–matured high seriousness of those adepts in public appearance,
the Americans, to sustain him, this last sublimation of democratic
statesmanship may really have believed that some kind of favourable
incantation was in progress under his direction.  He must have felt
that or he could not have remained there talking.  Incantations had
made him.  By the sheer use of voice and gesture he had clambered
from extreme obscurity to world prominence.  If he did not believe
in incantation there was nothing left for him to believe in.  He
must have clung to that persuasion to the end.  But if that was his
state of mind at the time, it could hardly have survived the
comments and criticisms of the next few months.  Surely then he had
some sleepless nights in which even his private incantations
failed.</p><p>The World Economic Conference lost its brilliance in a week or so.
The City, which had been so flushed with hope that for a time its
price lists, all pluses, looked like war–time cemeteries, relapsed
into depression.  The World Slump did not wait for the Conference
to disperse before it resumed.  At the outset London had been all
blown up and distended by bright anticipations, so that it was like
one of those little squeaking bladders children play with, and like
one of those bladders, so soon as the blowing ceased, it shrank and
shrivelled and ended in a dying wail of despair.</p><p>As Habwright puts it, by July 1933 intelligent men and women
everywhere were saying two things.  Of the assembled rulers and
delegates they were saying:  "These people can do nothing for us.
They do worse than nothing.  They intensify the disaster."  And in
the second place it was demanded with a sort of astonishment:  "Why
have historians, sociologists and economists nothing to tell us
now?  There may indeed be some excuse for the failure of
politicians under democratic conditions.  But have our universities
been doing nothing about it?  Is there indeed no science of these
things?  Is there no knowledge?  Has history learnt nothing of
causes, and is there no analysis of the social processes that are
destroying us?"</p><p>To which the professors, greatly preoccupied at that particular
date in marking honours papers in history and social and political
science, made no audible reply.</p><p>Before the end of the thirties it was plain to all the world that a
world–wide social catastrophe was now inevitably in progress, that
the sanest thing left for intelligent men to do was to set about
upon some sort of Noah's Ark to salvage whatever was salvageable of
civilization, so that there should be a new beginning after the
rising deluge of misfortune had spent itself.  A few prescient
spirits had been saying as much for some years, but now this idea
of salvage spread like an epidemic.  It prepared the way for the
Modern State Movement on which our present order rests.  At the
time, however, the general pessimism was little mitigated by any
real hope of recovery.  One writer, quoted by Habwright, compared
man to a domesticated ape, "which has had the intelligence and
ability to drag its straw mattress up to the fire when it is cold,
but has had neither the wit nor the foresight to escape the
consequent blaze".  Habwright's brief summary of the financial
operations that went on as the sense of catastrophe grew justifies
that grim image very completely.</p><p>The conviction that Parliamentary Democracy had come to an end
spread everywhere in that decade.  Already in the period between
the vacillation in international affairs after Versailles and the
warfare of the Forties, men had been going about discussing and
scheming and plotting for some form of government that should be at
least decisive.  And now their efforts took on a new urgency.
There was a world–wide hysteria to change governments and
officials.</p><p>At its first onset this craving for decisiveness had produced some
extremely crude results.  An epidemic of tawdry "dictatorships" had
run over Europe from Poland to Spain immediately after the war.
For the most part these adventures followed the pattern of the
pronunciamentos of the small South American republics, and were too
incidental and inconsequent for the student of general history to
be troubled about them now.  But there followed a world–wide
development of directive or would–be directive political
associations which foreshadowed very plainly the organization of
the Modern State Fellowship upon which our present world order
rests.</p><p>The Fascist dictatorship of Mussolini in Italy had something in it
of a more enduring type than most of the other supersessions of
parliamentary methods.  It rose not as a personal usurpation but as
the expression of an organization with a purpose and a sort of
doctrine of its own.  The intellectual content of Fascism was
limited, nationalist and romantic; its methods, especially in its
opening phase, were violent and dreadful; but at least it insisted
upon discipline and public service for its members.  It appeared as
a counter movement to a chaotic labour communism, but its support
of the still–surviving monarchy and the Church was qualified by a
considerable boldness in handling education and private property
for the public benefit.  Fascism indeed was not an altogether bad
thing; it was a bad good thing; and Mussolini has left his mark on
history.</p><p>In Russia something still more thorough and broader came into
operation after 1917.  This was the Communist Party.  It was the
invention of Lenin; he continued to modify and adapt its
organization and doctrine until his untimely death in 1924.  While
he lived Russia's experiment really seemed to be leading the world
in its flight towards a new order from the futile negations and
paralysis of Parliamentary government.  It is still profoundly
interesting to note the modernity of many aspects of the early
Bolshevik régime.</p><p>This modernity achieved under the stress of urgent necessities and
Lenin's guidance was attained in spite of many grave difficulties
created by the Marxist tradition.  Marx, who was a man of what the
psychologists of the middle twenty–first century used to call
"blinkered originality", never saw through the democratic
sentimentalities of the period in which he lived.  There had been a
tendency to exclude the privileged classes from the True Democracy
of Common Men even at the dawn of the modern democratic idea, and
he and his followers intensified and stereotyped this tendency in
their own particular version of deified democracy, the Proletariat.
The Proletariat was just Pure Masses, and mystical beyond measure.</p><p>But at the outset the actual Russian revolution was under the
control of the intensely practical and intensely middle–class
Lenin, and he took care that the great social reconstruction he had
in mind was equally secured against the risk of paralysis through
mass inertia and the risk of overthrow through mass panic.  His
ostensibly "democratic" government of Soviets, the Soviet pyramid,
was built up on a hierarchic scheme that brought the administration
face to face only with seasoned representatives who had been
filtered through an ascendant series of bodies.  Moreover, he
established a very complete control of education and the Press, to
keep the thought of the nominally sovereign masses upon the right
lines.  And to animate and control the whole machine he had his
invention of the Communist Party.</p><p>This Communist Party, like the Italian Fascisti, owes its general
conception to that germinal idea of the Modern State, the Guardians
in Plato's Republic.  For if anyone is to be called the Father of
the Modern State it is Plato.  The Members of the Communist Party
were extremely like those Guardians.  As early as 1900 critics of
democratic institutions were discussing the possibility of creating
a cult primarily devoted to social and political service, self–
appointed, self–trained and self–disciplined.  The English–speaking
Socialist movement was debating projects of that kind in 1909–10
(see Fabian News in Historical Documents for those years), but it
needed the dangers and stresses of the postwar European situation
to produce types of workers and young people sufficiently detached,
desperate and numerous, to unite effectively into a permanent
revolutionary control.</p><p>From its beginnings the Communist Party, though it was not divided
into "faculties" and remained political rather than technical in
spirit, resembled our own Modern State Fellowship in its insistence
upon continuous learning and training throughout life, upon free
criticism within the limits of the party, upon accessibility (under
due limitations) to all who wished to serve in it, and upon the
right to resignation from its privileges and severities of all who
wished to return to comparative irresponsibility.  But the
conditions which created the Russian Communist Party made it
inevitably Marxist, and even after a thorough Leninization,
Communism, that characteristic final product of middle–nineteenth–
century radicalism, still retained many of its old sentimentalities,
reverting indeed more and more towards them after Lenin's death and
the rule of the devoted but unoriginal, suspicious and overbearing
Stalin.</p><p>There was a heavy load of democratic and equalitarian cant upon the
back of the Russian system, just as there was a burthen of
patriotic and religious cant upon the Italian Fascist.  Even the
United States Constitution did not profess democratic equality and
insist upon the inspired wisdom of the untutored more obstinately
than the new Russian régime.  Although hardly any of the ruling
group of Russians were of peasant or working–class origin—there
were far more politicians from that social level in the public life
of Western Europe and America—there was a universal pretence of
commonness about them all.  They spat, they went unshaved and
collarless.  They pretended to be indifferent to bourgeois comfort.
It was ordained that at the phrase "Class–War" every knee should
bow.  When the Communist leaders quarrelled among themselves,
"bourgeois" or "petty bourgeois" was the favourite term of abuse,
none the less deadly because it was almost invariably true.  Long
years were to pass before any movement whatever in the direction of
the Modern State System was quite free from this heritage of cant.</p><p>One unfortunate aspect of this entanglement of the new experiment
in Russia with the social envies and hatreds of the old order was
its inability to assimilate competent technicians, organizers and
educators into its direction.  In its attempt to modernize, it
refused the assistance of just the most characteristically modern
types in the community.  But since these types had a special
education and knew things not generally known, it was difficult to
accord them proletarian standing.  In Russia therefore, as in
America, the politician with his eloquence and his necessary and
habitual disingenuousness still intervened and obstructed, if he
did not actually bar, the way to a scientific development of a new
economic and social order.</p><p>Manifestly Stalin learnt much from his difficulties with the Five
Year Plan of the evil of subordinating technical to political
ability, and a speech of his upon the Old and New Technical
Intelligentzia made in June 1931 (Historical Documents Series,
Stalinism, XM 327,705) is a very frank admission of the primary
necessity in the modern community of the "non–party" man of science
and of special knowledge.  Unhappily the hand of the party
politician in Russia was strengthened by the untrammelled
activities of those strange protectors of Marxist authority the
Checka, which became later the G.P.U.  So from 1928, the date of
the First Five Year Plan, in spite of a great driving–force of
enthusiastic devotion, Russia went clumsily, heavily and
pretentiously—a politician's dictatorship, propaganding rather
than performing, disappointing her well–wishers abroad and
thwarting the best intelligences she produced.  When her plans went
wrong through her lack of precise material foresight, she accused,
and imprisoned or shot, engineers and suchlike technical workers.</p><p>A further bad result of this ineradicable democratic taint of the
Soviet system was the widening estrangement of the Russian process
from Western creative effort.  Instead of being allies they became
opponents.  As the challenge of social disintegration became more
urgent in the Atlantic countries, it became plainer and plainer
that such hope as there was for the salvaging of a reconstructed
civilization from a welter of disaster lay in the coordinate effort
of intelligent, able and energetic individuals of every nation,
race, type and class.  A revolution was certainly needed, but not a
revolution according to the time–worn formula of street battles and
barricades, not a class war.  A revolution in the very character of
revolutions had to occur.  There was no need for insurrectionary
revolution any longer, since now the system was destroying itself.
The phase for boldly constructive revolution had arrived, and at
every point where constructive effort was made the nagging
antagonism of the Class War fanatic appeared, to impede and divide.
(See, for example, Upton Sinclair on this conflict, in The Way Out,
1933, in the series of reprints under his name, Historical
Documents Series, History of Opinion.)</p><p>The waste of creative energy was enormous, not only in Russia but
all over the world.  Multitudes of young men and women in every
civilized community, the living hope of the race, dissipated their
generous youth and vigour in bitter conflicts upon a purely
doctrinaire issue.  The poison of nationalism was abroad to
complicate their reactions.  Many turned against progress
altogether and sought to thrust the world back to some imaginary
lost age of virtue.  So they became Ku Klux Klansmen, Nationalists,
Nazis.  All felt the natural youthful impulse towards large,
effective, vehement action.  All meant well.  They were one in
spirit though they suffered from a confusion of tongues.  The idea
of the Modern State could not for a long time make itself clear to
their imaginations largely because the conspicuous self–
contradictions of Russia stood in the way.</p><p>Russia seemed to lead, it sought to lead in its acts and deeds,
and it lied.  Meanwhile, surviving very largely because of this
distraction of creative forces, the elderly methods of Parliamentary
Democracy and the elderly Nationalist Diplomacy remained in
possession of the greater part of the Western World, and the social
collapse it was powerless to arrest continued.</p></section><footer/></body></html>