<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>9: The Last War Cyclone, 1940-50</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch02s08.xhtml" title="8: A Note on Hate and Cruelty"/><link rel="next" href="ch02s10.xhtml" title="10: The Raid of the Germs"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="9: The Last War Cyclone, 1940-50" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646771660"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">9: The Last War Cyclone, 1940-50</h2></div></div></div><p>The drift to war in Europe became more powerful with the
elimination of Japan and the United States from the possibility of
intervention, and with the deepening preoccupation of Britain with
Indian disorder and with the Black Revolt in South Africa.  The
last restraints upon continental hatreds had gone.  The issues
simplified.</p><p>War came at last in 1940.  The particular incident that led to
actual warfare in Europe was due to a Polish commercial traveller,
a Pole of Jewish origin, who was so ill advised as to have trouble
with an ill–fitting dental plate during the halt of his train in
Danzig.  He seems to have got this plate jammed in such a fashion
that he had to open his mouth wide and use both hands to struggle
with it, and out of deference to his fellow passengers he turned
his face to the window during these efforts at readjustment.  He
was a black–bearded man with a long and prominent nose, and no
doubt the effect of his contortions was unpleasing.  Little did he
realize that his clumsy hands were to release the dogs of war from
the Pyrenees to Siberia.</p><p>The primary irritant seems to have been either an orange–pip or a
small fragment of walnut.</p><p>Unhappily, a young Nazi was standing on the platform outside and
construed the unfortunate man's facial disarrangement into a
hostile comment upon his uniform.  For many of these youths were of
an extreme innate sensibility.  The flames of patriotic indignation
shot up in his heart.  He called up three fellow guards and two
policemen—for like the Italian Fascisti these young heroes rarely
acted alone—and boarded the train in a swift and exemplary mood.
There was a furious altercation, rendered more difficult by the
facts that the offending Pole knew little or no German and was
still in effect gagged.  Two fellow travellers, however, came to
his help, others became involved, vociferation gave place to
pushing and punching, and the Nazis, outnumbered, were put off the
train.</p><p>Whereupon the young man who had started all the trouble,
exasperated, heated and dishevelled, and seeing that now altogether
intolerable Jew still making unsatisfactory passes with his hands
and face at the window, drew a revolver and shot him dead.  Other
weapons flashed into action, and the miniature battle was brought
to an end only by the engine–driver drawing his train out of the
station.  The matter was complicated politically by the fact that
the exact status of the Danzig police was still in dispute and that
the Nazis had no legal authority upon the Danzig platform.</p><p>By itself this distressing incident might have been arranged
without the outbreak of a European war.  The moribund League of
Nations might have been invoked or even the mummified Hague
Tribunal galvanized into activity; either institution was still
fully capable of dealing with, let us say, a Polish dentist who
might have been treated as the culpable party, traced, punished and
made the scapegoat of Europe.  But that would have needed a certain
goodwill on the part of the Powers directly involved, and at that
time no such goodwill was forthcoming.</p><p>For eight years now the German mind had been working up for a fight
over the Corridor, and the rearmament of Germany, overt and secret,
had been going on.  Both France and Poland had been watching the
military recovery of Germany with ever–deepening apprehension, and
the military authorities of both countries were urgent that a blow
should be struck while they were still disproportionately stronger.
Time after time it seemed that the crisis had come, and time after
time nothing more than a stock–exchange tornado had occurred.  Now
the last reasons for patience had disappeared.  The tension had
risen to a point at which disaster seemed like relief and Europe
was free to tear itself to fragments.</p><p>Such a situation was the inevitable climax to every "armed peace"
in the old belligerent world.  At some point there was an
irresistible logic in "Strike now before they get too strong".
That had been an underlying motive of primary force in the British
readiness to fight in 1914.  They were eager to strike before the
ever–growing German fleet equalled their own.  So they ended an
intolerable tension.  The Germans had "asked for it", they said.
"Better now than to–morrow."</p><p>Now again Germany has "asked for it" and Poland was leaping to the
occasion.  The War Offices pressed their bell buttons.  The
printing machines of Paris, London and New York were still busy
with various misstatements about the murdered commercial traveller,
while the Polish and German air patrols were in conflict all along
the fatal boundary.  That dental plate apparently began to feel
uncomfortable about one o'clock in the afternoon of Friday, January
4th, 1940.  On Saturday, about three o'clock in the afternoon,
Michael Koreniovsky, the Polish ace, after a brilliant fight with
three antagonists, fell flaming out of the sky into the crowded
Langgasse of Danzig and set fire to the Rathaus.</p><p>The first Polish air raid on Berlin and the unresisted "demonstration
flight" of two hundred French air squadrons in formation over
Bavaria and West Prussia followed.  The Germans seem to have been
taken completely by surprise by this display of immense and
immediate preparedness.  They had not thought it of the French.  But
they had the quickness of apprehension to decline an air battle
against odds, and the French flew home again.  The fighting on the
Polish–German frontier continued.</p><p>The authorities in Paris were uncertain whether they were
disappointed or relieved by the non–resistance of their old
enemies.  A smashing air victory over Germany would have been very
satisfactory and conclusive, but these aeroplanes were also wanted
at home to cow the ever–increasing domestic discontent.  An
indecisive battle—and that was always possible in the air—might
have produced serious internal stresses.</p><p>For a week of years from the resumption of armament by Germany in
1933, the diplomatic centres of the world had been watching the
steady onset of this conflict and had been doing nothing to avert
it.  Now London, Washington, Madrid and Geneva became hysterically
active.  There was a mighty running to and fro of ambassadors and
foreign ministers.  "Delay," said Geneva; though there had already
been twenty years of delay.</p><p>"Localize the conflict" was a phrase that leapt into vivid
prominence.  It found favour not only in the neutral countries, but
in Paris and Berlin.  In effect "localize the conflict" meant this:
it meant that Paris should scrap her engagements to Poland and
leave the Poles to make what sort of arrangements they could
between Germany and Russia.  For Russia now, by an enigmatical
silence combined with a prompt mobilization of the Red Army, became
almost immediately an important piece in the developing
international game.</p><p>And Paris had soon very excellent reasons for not pushing a
conflict with Berlin to extremities.  The first Frenchman to be
killed in the New Warfare had been killed already.  And he had been
killed in the Maritime Alps, shot by the bullet of an Italian
patrol.</p><p>On Sunday night, January the 6th, while the Polish aeroplanes were
dropping gas bombs on Berlin, the Italians were administering the
same treatment to Belgrade.  At the same time an identical note had
been dispatched from Rome to all the Powers giving Italy's reasons
for this decisive blow.  It seemed that between Friday evening and
Sunday morning there had been a violent recrudescence of Yugo–Slav
irreverence.  The Fascist agents who had to supply the material for
grievance and indignation had in fact overdone their task to the
pitch of caricature.  On Saturday the entire Italian population
found itself roused from its normal preoccupation with its daily
budget by the terrible intelligence of Mussolini everywhere made
bibulous and ophthalmious with red paint, of Venetian lions
coloured as indelicately as baboons and of shamefully overdecorated
Roman eagles.  Eloquent and dishevelled young Fascists, often in
tears, protested at every street corner against these intolerable
indignities and called for war.  The cup of Yugo–Slav iniquity was
full.  It was only in later years that astounded students, tracing
these outrages to their sources, realized how excessively that cup
had been filled to justify the Fascist invasion.</p><p>Once the Polish and Italian forces had crossed their boundaries the
other states of Eastern Europe did not wait even to produce an
insult before launching their offensives.  The whole crazy
patchwork of Versailles dissolved into fighting—the joyless,
frantic fighting of peoples full of hate and fear, led blindly to
no ends that anyone could foresee.  For two straining years the
theory of localizing the conflict held Russia and France out of the
fight.  A "formula" was found by which France undertook not to
intervene on the side of her erstwhile allies, on the understanding
that Russia by way of compensation also refrained from any action
against them.  Moreover, the trade in munitions was to be carried
on "impartially".  It was a flimsy formula to justify a diplomatic
default, but it kept warfare away from the Western front of Germany
for two distressful years.  The persistent shooting by Italians
over the French boundary was difficult to explain away, and indeed
it was not so much explained away as quietly disregarded.  The air
fleets of France paraded at intervals, to the increasing irritation
of all her immediate neighbours, but on the whole as a restraining
influence.  The demonstration chilled the foreigner and assuaged
the hotheads at home.</p><p>From the outset there was far less enthusiasm for this "localized"
European war of 1940 than had been displayed by the populations of
the belligerent countries in 1914.  What enthusiasm was displayed
was confined to the inexperienced young of the middle and upper
classes, the youth of the Fascisti, Nazi, "public schoolboy" and
scoutmaster type.  They went about, shouting and urgent, in a
heavy, sullen and apprehensive atmosphere.  No nation "leapt to
arms".  The common soldiers deserted and "fell out" incessantly,
and these shirkers were difficult to punish, since the "deserter
mentality" was so widespread, more particularly in the peasant
armies of Eastern Europe, that it was impossible to shoot
offenders.  One Posen battalion went into battle near Lodz with
thirty–nine officers and fifty–seven men.</p><p>From the first "economies" marched with the troops.  From the first
there was a threadbare needy quality about the struggle.  General
orders insisted upon "a restrained use of ammunition".</p><p>The actual fighting was, however, on a much higher level,
mechanically and scientifically, than the Japanese war in China.
The military authorities had good roads, automobiles, camions,
railways, rolling stock, electrical material, guns of all sorts,
and great air forces available.  Behind the fronts were chemical
and other munition factories in good working order.  If there were
no longer infantry battles there were some brilliant conflicts of
technicians.  The prompt cutting off of East Prussia from any help
from main Germany by the Permanent Death Gas was an operation far
above the technical level of any Eastern operations.  It was
strategically silly but technically very successful.</p><p>The first offensive against Berlin was also planned with modern
equipment and the maximum of contemporary military science.  It was
to be another "blow at the heart", and the Polish general staff
relied upon it as firmly as the Germans in 1914 had relied upon
their march on Paris.  Unfortunately for the Poles, it had been
necessary to consult a number of "experts" in preparing this
advance; there were leakages through France, through the Czech and
Swedish munition makers, through Russia, and through domestic
treason, and the broad outline of the plan was as well known and
understood in Berlin as it was in Warsaw.  The great gas raid on
Berlin was indeed terrifying and devastating, but the rush of
tanks, great caterpillar guns and troops in motor transport was
held and checked within sixty miles of the German capital by an
ingenious system of poison–gas barriers—chiefly Lewisite and Blue
Cross—wired mines and "slime pits" of a novel type in the roads
and open fields.  A cavalry raid to the north between Berlin and
the sea failed disastrously amidst wire, gas and machine–guns;
nearly forty thousand men were killed, wounded or taken prisoner.
Moreover, there had been mistakes in the manufacture of the gas
masks worn by the Polish troops, and several brigades gave way to
the persuasion that they had been sold and betrayed.  The main
Polish masses never came into actual contact with the German
troops, and only their great numerical superiority in aeroplanes
saved their repulse from becoming a rout.</p><p>The Polish armies rallied and, according to the secondary plan
prepared for any such failure, extended themselves and dug
themselves in along a line between Stettin and the Bohemian
frontier.  Behind the barrier they began a systematic reduction of
Silesia.  Every night an air battle raged over both Berlin and
Warsaw.  It was often an indecisive battle.  The Poles had the
numerical superiority, but the German machines were more efficient
and better handled.  But the Poles had far more of the new aerial
torpedoes—which could go to an assigned spot two hundred miles
away, drop a large bomb and return—than their adversaries.</p><p>Bohemia, like France, had mobilized but did not immediately enter
the war.  The Czecho–Slovak armies remained in their mountain
quadrilateral or lined out along the Hungarian front, awaiting the
next turn in the game.  Austria also remained excited but neutral.</p><p>The Southern war opened brilliantly for the Italians, and for some
weeks it went on without any formal connexion with the Polish
conflict.  Bulgaria, Albania and Hungary also declared war upon
Yugo–Slavia, the Italian air forces "darkened the sky", and few of
the towns in Croatia and Serbia escaped an aerial bombardment.  The
Italian fleet set itself to capture the ports and islands of
Dalmatia.  But the advance of the Italian troops into the hills of
Slavonia and Croatia was not as rapid as had been expected.  Six
weeks passed before they were able to fight their way to Zagreb.</p><p>The country was a difficult one, ill adapted to the use of gas or
mechanism, there was no central point at which a decisive blow
could be struck, and the population had a long tradition of
mountain warfare.  It did not affect these sturdy peasants whether
the townsmen were bombed or not.  They never gave battle; they
never exposed themselves in masses, but their bullets flew by day
and night into the Italian encampments.  Many of them went to and
fro between their fields and the front.  Munitions poured in for
them through Roumania, which, with a big Red Army on its
Bessarabian frontier and its own peasants recalcitrant, remained
also ambiguously, dangerously, and yet for a time profitably, out
of the struggle.  The Hungarians crossed the Yugo–Slav frontier and
threatened Belgrade, but the mass of their forces faced towards
Czecho–Slovakia and awaited further events.</p><p>A curious pause in the fighting occurred at the end of the year.
The frantic efforts of Prague, London and Paris to call a halt were
temporarily successful.  The invaders of Germany and Yugo–Slavia
remained upon enemy territory, but neutral zones were improvised
and there was a cessation of hostilities.  An eleventh–hour attempt
was made to stop the war by negotiation and keep the two conflicts
from coalescence.  There were weeks during which this seemed
possible.  Both Germany and Poland were of two minds about
continuing the war now that the Polish advance was held, and Italy
hoped to be left in possession of Dalmatia without an irksome
campaign of further conquest.  It was as if the spirit of
civilization had once more come near to awakening from its
hallucinations and had asked, "Why on earth is this happening to
us?"</p><p>The British Cabinet thought the occasion opportune for a conference
at Vevey to revise the Treaty of Versailles "finally".  The pacific
speeches of Duff–Cooper, Hore–Belisha, Ellen Wilkinson and Randolph
Churchill echoed throughout Europe and were brilliantly supported
by Benito Caruso and Corliss Lamont in America.  The Pope, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Non–conformist Churches, the
President of the Swiss Republic and the able and venerable
President Benes swelled the chorus of remonstrance.  France, which
had been growing steadily more pacificist after her social
conflicts in 1934–35, found able spokesmen in Louchère and
Chavanne.  Once again we are reminded of the impulses of Henry Ford
and Wilson.  Once again the concept of a World Pax flickered in the
human imagination and vanished.  This time it was a fuller, more
explicit and more unanimous chorus than that which had cried aloud
in 1916–17.  Yet at the time it was hardly more effective.  Vevey
prolonged the truce throughout 1941 until June, but it could settle
nothing.  The military authorities, having had a breathing–time,
became impatient.  With a mutually destructive malice the fighting
was resumed "before the harvest could be gathered".</p><p>Vevey failed because the constructive conception of the Modern
State had no representative there.  It was just another gathering
of national diplomatists who professed to seek peace, and yet who
set about the business with all those antiquated assumptions of
sovereignty that were bound to lead to a revival of the conflict.
The fantasy of some "balance of power" was as near as they ever
came to a peace idea.  Such a balance was bound to sway from year
to year and from day to day.  Whatever the common people and men of
intelligence were thinking, the experts now wanted to see the war
fought to a finish.  "The Germans hadn't been beaten enough" was
all too acceptable to the munition dealers and the Press in France
and Scandinavia.  "The Italians have their hands full in Yugo–
Slavia."</p><p>The British and Americans, who hoped to keep out of the conflict to
the end, had experienced an exhilarating revival of exports and
found their bills against the belligerents mounting very hopefully.
Once more Tyneside echoed to hammering; steel, iron and chemical
shares boomed and the iron and steel industry, like some mangy,
toothless old tiger, roused itself for the only quarry it had now
the vigour to pursue—man–eating.  It had long ceased to dream of
new liners or bridges or railways or steel–framed houses.  But it
could still make guns and kill.  It could not look far enough ahead
to reckon whether at last there would be any meat on the man's
bones.  The only countries that really wanted peace, enduring
peace, were Czecho–Slovakia and Austria, which stretched out
between the two combatant systems and had possible enemy frontiers
on every hand.  The human will for peace as it found expression at
Vevey was still a tangled and ineffective will.</p><p>The fighting revived almost simultaneously in the Polish Ukraine,
where the peasants had revolted and were evidently fighting with
Soviet officers and equipment, and in a vigorous surprise attack
upon the Polish lines to free the German soil from the invader.
The Germans had been working night and day during the truce to
equalize conditions in the air; they produced new and swifter
aeroplanes and a particularly effective machine–gun, and for some
weeks there was such aerial fighting as was never seen before or
since.</p><p>Gradually the Germans established a sufficient ascendancy to bring
their bombers and gas into play.  Lodz and Warsaw were terrorized
and the civilian population evacuated and the Polish line broken so
as to restore communications with Silesia.  And then the conflict
broadened.  Lithuania, evidently with Russian encouragement, seized
her old city of Wilna, and Austria linked the Northern and the
Southern struggle by entering both wars as the ally of Germany and
Italy.  Germany declared her final union with Austria.  Very
swiftly now the remaining European states followed one another into
the cauldron.  Hungary attacked Eastern Czecho–Slovakia without a
declaration of war "to restore her legitimate boundaries", and
brought the army frameworks of Roumania into the field against her.
Thereupon Russia announced the impossibility of maintaining her
understanding with France in the face of these events, and the Red
Army advanced on Lemberg.  Macedonia was already a seething mass of
fighting, village against village; Bulgaria entered the "South
Slav" alliance and assailed Albania, and Greece seized Rhodes,
which had been up to that time held by Italy.</p><p>So France saw her ancient policy of "security", of setting state to
balance state and allying herself with a countervailing state at
the back of every antagonistic neighbour, work out to its necessary
conclusion.  Gladly would her business men and her peoples now have
rested behind her immensely fortified frontiers and shared the
profits of neutrality and munition–selling with the British and
Americans, but her engagements were too binding.  After one last
ambiguous attempt on the part of London, Washington and Geneva to
avert the disaster, France declared war against the Central
European alliance in 1943.</p><p>On the face of it the new war resembled the World War of 1914–18.
It seemed to be an attempt to reverse or confirm the Versailles
settlement.  It had an air of being the same sort of siege of
Central Europe.  But now Italy was in close alliance with the
Teutonic powers; Belgium, in a state of extreme industrial
distress, was out of the war; Britain stood aloof; and in the place
of her former Allies France had to help—rather than be helped—by
the band of states from the Corridor to the Black Sea and the
Balkans which the Quai d'Orsay had toiled so painfully to knit into
an anti–German alliance.</p><p>Russia, however, was a doubtful ally of the Central Powers; she was
not operating in concert with them; she was simply supporting the
new Soviet republics in Eastern Poland and Bessarabia.  There the
Red Army halted.  The old enthusiasm for a World Revolution had
faded out of the Russian imagination.  Marxism had become so
Russianized that it feared now to take in too large a contingent of
Western adherents.  The Kremlin was content to consolidate the
kindred Slav Soviets and then rest.  Japan and China and the
American continent remained out of the mêlée, concentrated on their
own social difficulties.</p><p>It would be possible for a superficial student to regard all this
merely as a rearrangement of the familiar counters of sovereign
state politics.  But, in reality, the forces in collision were
profoundly different.  France, in spite of her internal social
stresses, was still a capitalist community of the Nineteenth
Century type, with democratic parliamentary forms and irresponsible
finance and industrialism.  Save for the teaching of a sentimental
patriotism, her young people were mentally unorganized.  Her allies
were peasant states with governments of the royal or parliamentary
form, and, if anything, more old–fashioned.  But the Central Powers
were all of the new Fascist pattern, more closely knit in its
structure and dominated by an organization of the younger spirits,
which claimed to be an élite.</p><p>Except for the fundamentally important fact that these Fascisti
were intensely nationalist, this control by a self–appointed, self–
disciplined élite was a distinct step towards our Modern State
organization.  These various Fascisti were destined to destroy
their own states and disappear because of their essentially shallow
and sentimental mentality, their inability to get outside
nationalist traditions and coalesce; there is no direct continuity
between them and our modern educational and administrative system;
but there was nothing like them in the World War of 1914–18
anywhere, and they are noteworthy, as the Russian Communist Party
(in spite of its proletarian formula) is noteworthy, for their
partial but very real advance on democratic institutions.  Amidst
the chaos, that organized "devotion of the young" on which our
modern community rests was clearly foreshadowed in these Central
European states.  The idea of disciplined personal participation in
human government was being driven into the mentality of the new
generation.</p><p>Until something more convincing appeared, it had to crystallize,
disastrously enough, about such strange nuclei as the theatrical
Mussolini and the hysterical Hitler.  It had to be patriotic
because that was the only form in which the State then presented
itself.  But after these first crystallizations had been shattered
and dissolved in the war disasters that now ensued, the idea was
still there, this idea of banded cooperation ready to be directed
to greater ends.  Youth had ceased to be irresponsible in all the
Fascist countries.</p><p>Not only were these new wars unlike their predecessors in the fact
that they were not, so far as the Central Powers were concerned,
wars of the democratic masses, but also they were quite
unprecedented in the range and quality of the fighting.  We have
already indicated some of the main differences between the New
Warfare and the Old.  These now became accentuated by the
extraordinary way in which the boundaries of the battling states
interdigitated.  In the first spurt of conflict there was indeed a
"front" between Poland and Germany; but after 1943 there was no
front, no main objective, and no central idea to the storming
destruction that spread over Europe.</p><p>The Poles tried to draw a line of Permanent Death Gas across East
Brandenburg before their withdrawal to Posen, but their collapse
came too swiftly, and they were able only to poison three small
areas of no strategic importance.  After 1943 the war became mainly
a war in the air, with an increasing use of gas and landing raids,
raids rather than invasions, to seize, organize and hold
advantageous positions.  A bitter and intense naval struggle went
on in the Mediterranean to cut off reinforcements and supplies
between North Africa and France, but there was little molestation
of the Atlantic traffic of France.</p><p>There was never an Aerial Trafalgar, never an Air Ecnomus.  War in
three dimensions does not afford those channels, straits, narrow
seas, passes, main roads, by which an inferior force may be brought
to a decisive battle, and indeed to this day it is uncertain which
side was absolutely predominant in the air.  It was a war of raids
and reprisals, and no large decisive operations were attempted.  A
big German infantry push into Posen was held by gas and slimes, and
a French invasion of Italy got no further than Turin.</p><p>The complete exhaustion of the adversary, materially and morally,
became the only possible road to any sort of victory.  Once more
the tormented populations were urged to sustain a "war of
attrition".  "It is the man who holds out half an hour longer than
the other who wins" was translated into every European language.
The attacks on social order increased in malignancy as the
impossibility of any military decision became manifest.  Crops and
forests were deliberately fired, embankments smashed, low–lying
regions flooded, gas and water supplies destroyed.  The aviators
would start off to look for a crowd and bomb it.  It became as
cruel as the fighting of ferrets.</p><p>There was still, in spite of a decade of financial dislocation and
industrial depression, a vast amount of mechanical material in
Europe; everywhere there were factories strongly protected against
air attack and skilfully camouflaged.  Moreover, all the chief
belligerents had sufficiently open frontiers for the importation of
material, so long as anything compact and valuable could be wrung
out of their nationals by tax or levy, to pay for such supplies.
The goods crossed the frontier at night; the cargoes were piloted
into unlit harbours.  Every able–bodied adult not actually in the
fighting forces was pressed to work at excavations for bomb
shelters and the reconstitution of buildings against gas and high
explosive.  Much of this also was night work.  Recalcitrance and
shirking were punished by a deprivation of rations.  There is a
grim picture by Eglon Callet called "Security at Last", of which
the reader may have seen reproductions.  A chain gang of emaciated
and ragged Frenchmen is working under the lash in a tunnel.  In the
foreground one who has fainted is being given a stimulant; another,
past help, dies untended.</p><p>In comparison with the abundant literature of personal experiences
in the World War, at least so far as the Western front was
concerned, there are remarkably few records either of combatant or
non–combatant adventures during the Fighting Forties.  The big air
raids seem to have been altogether horrible.  They were much more
dreadful than the air raids of the World War.  They began with a
nightmare of warning maroons, sirens, hooters and the shrill
whistles of cyclist scouts, then swarms of frantic people running
to and fro, all pride and dignity gone, seeking the nearest shelter
and aid, and they ended for most of their victims in an extremity
of physical suffering.</p><p>We have already given some intimation of the nature of those
torture deaths.  In nearly every case the organization of refuges
and gas masks broke down.  In many cases there had never been a
real provision, but only sham visors and sham bomb–proof buildings
to allay "premature" panic and "keep up the popular morale".  None
of these great raids was ever reported in the newspapers that still
struggled on into the war years.  Even in America the publication
of any detail was treated as "pacificist propaganda against
recruiting".</p><p>There is a descriptive letter from Berlin after an air raid,
undated and signed "Sinclair", which is believed by most competent
critics to have been written by Sinclair Lewis the novelist (1885–
1990).  One passage may be quoted:</p><p>"We went down Unter den Linden and along the Sieges Allee, and the
bodies of people were lying everywhere, men, women and children,
not scattered evenly, but bunched together very curiously in heaps,
as though their last effort had been to climb on to each other for
help.  This attempt to get close up to someone seems to be
characteristic of death by this particular gas.  Something must
happen in the mind.  Everyone was crumpled up in the same fashion
and nearly all had vomited blood.  The stench was dreadful,
although all this multitude had been alive twenty–four hours ago.
The body corrupts at once.  The archway into the park was almost
impassable…."</p><p>So we get one glimpse of how peaceful town–bred people might die a
century and a half ago.</p><p>The individual stories of the actual fighting in that last warfare
are no more ample than the non–combatant descriptions.  There was
little inducement for anyone to write about it in the subsequent
decades; there was not the same high proportion of literate men as
there was in the Western armies during the Great War; there was a
less artless interest in what was happening and more running away,
desertion, apathy, drunkenness, raping, plundering and malignant
cruelty, which are not things of which men leave records.  The
whole world was less sensitive than it had been thirty years
before; if it suffered more grossly it suffered less acutely.  In
1914–15 many of the British and German rankers kept diaries from
day to day.  This shows a sense of personality and a receptiveness
to events quite outside the sullen fatalism, shot with gleams of
primitive exaltation or fury, which seems to have been the
prevalent state of mind in the armies of the Forties.</p><p>In the Historical Documents Series there is a diary of a Japanese
officer who was killed in the retreat from Wuchang.  Failing any
European material of the same kind, it may perhaps be quoted here
to show how it felt to fight in the last wars of all.  It is not,
however, a very vivid document.  He was an intellectual, a
socialist and a strong believer in the League of Nations, and his
record is mainly a series of hostile criticisms in cypher of the
superior command.  But in the latter half these dissertations die
out.  The diary becomes a broken record of what he found to eat and
drink and how he fought against influenza and dysentery.  He seems
to have had a company of men with him; he notes twice when he
contrived a haul of food for them, and he jots down names as they
are killed or missing.  There are also figures that may be a note
of his diminishing ammunition.  He was already badly starved when
he was killed.  As he weakened he seems to have found his rather
complicated cypher too difficult to use, and he lapsed first into
bad English and then into plain Japanese.  The very last item is an
unfinished poem, a fragment in the old style, which might be
rendered as follows:</p><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Almond blossom in the spring sunshine,</td></tr><tr><td>Fuji–Yama gracious lady,</td></tr><tr><td>Island treasure home of lovely things,</td></tr><tr><td>Shall I never see you again? …</td></tr></table><p>Something, death perhaps, prevented the completion of his naive
verses.  He and his detachment were probably overtaken and done to
death near Kai–feng.</p><p>In none of these later war memoirs is there anything to recall that
queer quality of the 1914–18 stories, of men who felt they were
going out from absolutely sure and stable homes and cities, to
which with reasonable good fortune they would return—and live
happily ever afterwards.  The mood then was often extraordinarily
brave and tender.  The men of this later cycle of wars felt that
there would be no such home–coming.  They knew that they went out
to misery and left misery in active possession at home.  Their war
was not an expedition; it was a change for ever.  The memoirs of
the airmen who did so much destruction are amazingly empty.  They
note fights, but quite flatly.  "Put down two Polaks", for example;
"a close shave"; but they do not seem to have had an inkling of the
effect of the bombs they dropped upon the living flesh below.  Many
of these young men survived to become Modern State aviators and to
serve the Air and Sea Control after 1965.  But though some wrote
well of their later experiences, none of them has left any useful
documents for the history of the war time.  The historian turns to
his dates, maps and totals again from this meagre salvage of the
hopes, fears, dreads, curiosities and agonies of the millions who
went through that age of cruel disaster, doubtful whether he is
sorry or thankful that most of that welter of feeling and suffering
has vanished now as completely as though it had never been.</p><p>After 1945 the signs of exhaustion multiplied.  Such despair had
come to the souls of men that even defensive energy failed.  They
lay starving in their beds and hovels and let the bombs fall about
them.  But a whiff of gas could still cause a panic, a headlong
rush of tormented people coughing and spitting through the streets
to the shelter pits.  Influenza with its peculiar intensity of
mental depression came again repeatedly after 1942, and in 1945
came cholera.  These epidemics, though they seemed grave enough at
the time, were the mere first scouts of that great "Raid of the
Germs" which was in preparation for disunited humanity.  It was as
if they were testing the defensive organization of mankind.</p><p>Except for air warfare, Britain and the North European neutrals
were suffering almost as acutely as if they were actually at war.
They had poured munitions into Europe and reaped a harvest of bad
debts.  After the first economic exhilaration due to this state of
employment, the exports from Great Britain, which had once been the
pioneer of free world trade and cosmopolitan thought, dwindled to
insignificance; the erstwhile creditor of the world could not
collect such debts as were still due to her, and could not pay
therefore for the food supply of her dwindling but still excessive
population.  Her former sanitation had rotted to filthiness under a
régime of relentless saving.  Housing in that disagreeable climate
had passed from congestion to horror.  The first cholera epidemic
found her in the throes not only of famine but of civil disorder,
controlled and suppressed by her highly mechanized army and by the
still very powerful habits of orderliness and subordination in her
people.  Never, since the Black Death of the Fifteenth Century, had
the British Isles known such a pestilence.  They had believed the
days of pestilence were past for ever.  And yet that cholera was
only the precursor of the still more terrible experiences that were
to follow it in the subsequent decade.</p><p>Slowly but surely the spirit of protest and mutiny spread through
Europe.  That growing despairful insubordination that had done so
much to bring about the winding up of the World War in 1918
reappeared in new forms.  But because now war was no longer
primarily an infantryman's business, mass mutiny, such as had
crippled the French offensives after 1917, taken Russia out of the
war, and led to the final German collapse, had not now the same
disabling effect.  There were not the same big aggregations of men
under exasperating discipline and in touch with "subversive"
suggestions.  Power had passed over to the specialized forces—to
the aviators and war technicians.  By the use of small bombs,
machine–guns and the milder gases they could "handle" and disperse
mass meetings and "tranquillize" insurgent districts in a manner
that would have been inconceivable to the street barricade
revolutionaries of the later Eighteenth Century.</p><p>Even strikes in the munition factories were no longer so effective
as they had been, because even there the increased efficiency of
power production had ousted the comparatively unskilled worker
in his multitudes.  For the same reason the propaganda of
insurrectionary class–war communism, though it now dominated the
thought of nine–tenths of the European peasants and workers, found
unexpected obstacles in its attempts to seize control of affairs.
It could not repeat the Russian social revolution because the new
conditions were entirely different.  The Bolshevik success had been
possible only through the backwardness of Russia and the absence
of a technically educated social stratum.  The unrest and
insubordination of the common people in Central and Western Europe
could and did produce immense passive resistances and local
revolutionary movements, but it found opposed to it a whole system
of aviators, mechanics, technicians, scientific workers and so
forth who had learnt from Red Russia what sort of direction and
planning to expect from a proletariat led by party politicians.
Whatever they thought about their own governments—and already they
were beginning to think in a very fresh and vigorous fashion about
them—it was not towards democratic communism that the minds of the
scientific and technical workers were turning.</p><p>Nevertheless, with the help of organizers from Russia, the protest
of humanity against the prolongation of the New Warfare took for a
time the form of communist risings.  In 1947, in Marseilles, St.
Etienne, Paris, Barcelona, Milan, Naples, Hamburg, Lodz and Glasgow
there were mutinies of troops under arms and risings sufficiently
formidable to sustain provisional Soviets for periods varying from
a week to several months.  The Hamburg and Glasgow Soviets were the
best organized and held out longest, collapsing only after
considerable bloodshed.  Almost everywhere there were minor
incidents of the same character.  And the formal suspension of the
war by the responsible governments concerned was certainly due more
than anything else to their terror of a general social revolt.  As
the material organization of the system was shattered, as the
behaviour of the technicians became uncertain, the threatening
visage of the class–vindictive proletarian drew nearer and nearer
to the face of the stockbroker, the war–monger, the banker, the
traditional ruler.</p><p>It took nearly three years to end the last war.  The Conference of
London in 1947 did its best to work out a stable settlement of
Europe on the lines of the Versailles Treaty, but the politicians
and diplomatists were still incapable of the frankness and
generosity needed.  Face–saving was so much more important than
life–saving to these creatures that they actually allowed the now
pointless hostilities to be renewed in 1948.</p><p>In the spring of 1949, however, at Prague, President Benes achieved
what had seemed to be the impossible, and brought the fighting to
an end.  He did this by inventing a phrase and suggesting, instead
of a treaty, a "Suspension of Hostilities".  Each Power was to
remain in possession of the territory it occupied, and there was to
be no further fighting pending the assembly of an unspecified
Conference to be organized later.  Influenza, cholera, and at last
maculated fever, the progressive enfeeblement of economic life and
new developments of human relationship, prevented that Conference
from ever meeting.  The Benes Suspension of Hostilities became a
permanent suspension.  It endures to this day.</p></section><footer/></body></html>