<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>8: A Note on Hate and Cruelty</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch02s07.xhtml" title="7: The Modern State and Germany"/><link rel="next" href="ch02s09.xhtml" title="9: The Last War Cyclone, 1940-50"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="8: A Note on Hate and Cruelty" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646752960"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">8: A Note on Hate and Cruelty</h2></div></div></div><p>[This section was in a detached fascicle, but its place seems to be
here.—ED.]</p><p>The student of history will find it almost impossible to understand
the peculiar difficulties of political life as it was lived until
about a hundred years ago, nor will he grasp the essential
differences between what was called education in those days and the
educational processes we are still developing to–day, unless he
masters the broad facts about these systems of hatred that
dominated the group relationships of mankind right up to the
assertion of the Modern State.  We have given the main particulars
of the issue between the Germans and the Poles, but that is only
one striking and historically important instance of a general
condition.  We could give fifty such chapters.  Nearly everywhere
populations were to be found steeped in and moved by mass hatreds
of a volume and obduracy outside any contemporary human experience.</p><p>All these hatreds arose out of the same essential causes.  Two or
more population groups, each with its own special narrow and
inadaptable culture and usually with a distinctive language or
dialect, had been by the change of scale in human affairs jammed
together or imposed one upon another.  A sort of social dementia
ensued.  In the absence of a common idea of community, civilized
motives gave place to instinctive hostilities and spasmodic
impulses.</p><p>Wherever there were mingled populations these hates were found and,
except in the Basque country, Wales and Lapland, they were intense
enough to be of primary political importance.  South and east of
Bohemia there seemed no boundary to the realms of hate.  The Magyar
hated the Slav, the Slav the Italian, the Roumanian the Russian.
Religious differences, the mischief of priests, cut up even racial
solidarities; the Catholic Slav hated the Orthodox Slav and the
Orthodox Greeks in Macedonia were hopelessly divided among
themselves.  Over all the ancient domain of the Sultan, through
Persia, through India, hates extended.  Islam was rent by two
ancient hate systems.  These mass hatreds were accepted in a kind
of despair by even the wisest.  They defied the policies of
statesmen absolutely.  They were supposed to be beyond human
control.</p><p>It is extraordinary how recent is the intelligent mitigation and
suppression of hatred.  Our ancestors did not envisage this as a
controllable mental disease.  They did not know that it was
possible to get through life without hatred, just as they did not
know that the coughs and colds that afflicted them and most of the
phenomena of senility were avoidable.</p><p>But it is amazing to think how submissively human beings allowed
their lives to be spoilt by controllable things—until almost
within living memory.  It was not only against hate and envy that
they made no effort.  They left their poor nerves bare and
unprotected from an endless persecution by man–made afflictions.
Up to 2010 they lived in towns that were crazy with noise; there
was practically no control of offensive sounds, and the visual
clamour of advertisements died out only in the needy decades that
preceded the Air Dictatorship.  But then it was still hardly more
than a century that there had been sufficient light upon the towns
and highways to drive away the blackness of night and overcast
weather.  In northern climates in the winter before the twentieth
century people lived between the nocturnal dark and a dismal grey
half–light which they called daylight, not seeing the sun often for
weeks together.</p><p>And before the nineteenth century it is clear to anyone who can
read between the lines that mankind STANK.  One has only to study
the layout and drainage of their houses and towns, their
accommodation for washing, their exiguous wardrobes, the absence of
proper laundry organization and of destructors for outworn objects,
to realize that only usage saved them from a perpetual disgust and
nausea.  No wonder that, quite apart from their bad food and
loathsome cooking, they coughed, spat, ached, went deaf and blind
and feeble, in a continual alternation of lassitude and mutual
irritation.</p><p>These conditions of life have gone one after another and almost
imperceptibly.  Few of us realize how different it was to be a
human being only a few hundred years ago.  It is only when we take
our imaginations with us back into the past that we realize how
evil to nose, eye, ear and soul the congregation of human beings
could be.  And necessarily, inevitably, because of the ill–
interpreted protests of body and mind against this mode of
existence, they hated—almost at haphazard.  We have in Swift's
Gulliver's Travels (1726) the cry of one man of exceptional
intelligence and sensibility who discovered himself imprisoned as
it were in the life of the eighteenth century and could find
neither outlet nor opiate.  The reek of the kennels of a medieval
town was nothing to the stench of hatred in the popular Press of
the twentieth century.  The ordinary newspaper of that time was not
so much a news sheet as a poison rag.  Every morning the common man
took in fresh suggestions of suspicion and resentment and gratified
his spite with bad news and malicious gossip.</p><p>Hatred, we know, is a morbid, infectious and preventable relapse to
which the mammalian cerebrum, and particularly the cerebrum of the
social types, is prone.  It is a loss of rational control.  It is
caused normally by small repeated irritations of the cerebral
cortex.  The contagion may occur at any phase before or after
maturity, and acute attacks predispose the brain for recurrence and
may run together at last into a chronic condition of vindictive
disapproval.</p><p>Once hatred has established itself to that extent it seems to be
ineradicable.  The patient seeks, often with the greatest
ingenuity, occasion for offence, and finds a profound satisfaction
in the nursing of resentment and the search for reprisals and
revenges.  He has what he calls his "proper pride".  He disapproves
of his fellow creatures and grudges them happiness.  Our current
education is framed very largely to avert and anticipate this
facile contagion, but the Press of that time subsisted by its
dissemination, in the interests of reactionary forces.  We are as
sedulous now for cleanliness and ventilation in our mental as in
our physical atmosphere.  The contrast between a contemporary crowd
and the crowds depicted by Hogarth or Raphael is not simply in the
well–clad, well–grown, well–nourished and well–exercised bodies,
the absence of rags and cripples, but in the candid interested
faces that replace the introverted, suspicious and guarded
expressions of those unhappy times.  It is only in the light of
this universal malaria that human history can be made comprehensible.</p><p>And now this great German mind stretching across the centre of
Europe in seventy million brains was incapable of autotherapy, and
let its sickness have its way with it.  It would not recognize that
it suffered from anything but a noble resentment.  Least of all
peoples was it able to entertain those ideas of a world–wide
cooperation of the World–State, which were still seeking their
proper form and instrument.  It was a deeper hate altogether than
the fear–begotten hate of the French.  In both these antagonized
countries cosmopolitan sanity went begging, but most so in Germany.</p><p>The fluctuations in German hatred during the Thirties were
curiously affected by subconscious currents of discretion.  Though
Germany was fiercely belligerent in spirit, her armament still
lagged behind that of her neighbours; her Hitlerites snarled and
threatened, but rather against Poland than France, and when the
tension became too great it found relief by outrages upon
Communists, Pacificists and intellectuals and by an exacerbated
persecution of those whipping–boys of the Western civilization, the
Jews.  From the accession of Hitler to the chancellorship of the
Reich in 1933 onward, not only looting and massacre, but legalized
outrage, became an ever present menace in the life of the German
Jew.</p><p>Faber speaks in his studies of political psychology of the "hate
map" of the world.  The intensity of the colouring of such a map
would vary widely.  The English–speaking states (except for
Ireland, that erstwhile "island of evergreen malice", which is now
the most delightful and welcoming of summer resorts) and the
Spanish–speaking communities felt hate far less intensely than the
peoples of the continental European patchwork.  They were less
congested, they were free from acute alien interference, they had
more space to move about in, and the infection was not so virulent.
For two decades Spain and Spanish South America (after the Peruvian
Settlement) sustained indeed a more liberal and creative mentality
than any other region of the world.  The Spanish contribution,
beginning with Unamuno and Ortega y Gasset and going onward through
a long list of great names, was of increasing importance in the
building up of the Modern World–State.</p><p>Russia, we may note, was never so constructive mentally as Spain.
She had not now the same wealth of freely thinking and writing men.
She had no surplus of mental energy to philosophize.  She
ecstasized, prophesied or dogmatized.  Such brain discipline as she
had was used up in her sprawling technical efforts.  But she again
was not a malignant country.  Young Russia was taught to hate
indeed, but to hate a dissolving enemy, the Wicked Imperialist.
Even in that hate there was an element of humorous caricature.
When in due course the Wicked Imperialist faded away to the quality
of a nursery Ogre, he took with him most of the hatred out of
Russia.  Hate, except in brief vivid spurts, does not seem
congenial to the Russian temperament.</p><p>Few people in 1940 realized that the essential political trouble in
the world, as distinguished from its monetary malaise, was this
endemic disease, and still fewer had the boldness of mind even to
think of the drastic cleansing and destruction of infected social
institutions and economic interests and accumulations that was
needed if the disease was ever to be stamped out.  Meanwhile along
the tangled frontiers of Central and Eastern Europe the sores
festered and the inflammation increased.</p><p>Among the more frequent methods of releasing hatred in the more
troubled communities were aggressive demonstrations inviting or
involving violence, attacks on representative buildings, such as
embassies and consulates, the defilement of flags, statues and
other symbols (in India the slaughter of sacred or forbidden
animals such as cows or pigs in holy places), quarrels picked in
cafés and restaurants, beatings–up, assassinations, the throwing of
bombs and crackers into parties and gatherings of the objectionable
nationality, or into law courts, religious buildings and other
unsuitable places for an explosion, firing at sentinels and across
boundaries.  Along the Adriatic coast it would appear there was an
exceptionally strong disposition to insult the characteristic
Italian respect for statues and pictures.</p><p>This was of recent origin.  At the Congress of Versailles Italy had
been bilked by her French and British Allies of a considerable
amount of the Dalmatian coast–line—to which indeed neither she nor
they had any right, but which nevertheless had been promised to her
in the secret engagements that had brought her into the World War.
Her patriots had never ceased to resent this broken promise, nor
the Jugo–Slav peoples, who held the coveted districts, to fear a
forcible annexation.  There had been much propaganda about the
dispute.  One prominent argument on the Italian side was that the
Republic of Venice (of which Rome was the natural heir) had
formerly dominated this coast, and, in proof of this, appeal was
made to the public buildings in the towns of the disputed regions,
which everywhere bore the insignia of their Italian founders and
particularly the distinctive lion of Venice.  For that was the
Fascist fantasy: wherever the Venetian lion had made its lair or
the Roman eagles cast their shadows, from Hadrian's Wall in England
to Mesopotamia, the Fascisti claimed to rule.</p><p>This contention, though taken calmly enough by the English, French,
Spanish, Turks and other emancipated peoples, was bitterly resented
by the populations more immediately threatened, and particularly
did it arouse resentment and hatred along the Dalmatian coast.  For
the young and excitable Slav, those sculptured lions and archaic
eagles, those antique vestiges, were robbed of their artistic and
historical charm; they took on an arrogant contemporary quality and
seemed to demand an answer to their challenge.  His response was to
deface or mutilate them.</p><p>Already in 1932 there were bitter recriminations between Rome and
Belgrade on this score, and in 1935 and again in 1937 fresh trouble
arose.  The later occasions were not simply matters of chipping and
breaking.  These heraldic and highly symbolic animals were now
painted, and painted in such a manner as to bring them into grave
contempt.  And the outrages were not confined to heraldic animals.
Portraits and images of Mussolini were also adorned all too often
with pencilled moustaches, formidable whiskers, a red nose and
other perversions of his vigorous personality.</p><p>Such vexatious modes of expression were in constant evidence in
all the inflamed areas.  To us they seem trivial, imbecile,
preposterous, but then they were steeped in tragic possibility.</p><p>The reader must picture for himself, if he can, how things went in
the brain of some youngster growing to manhood in one of these hate
regions, the constant irritation of restrictions, the constant urge
to do some vivid expressive thing, the bitter, unconsoling mockery
against the oppressor, and at last the pitiful conspiracy, the
still more pitiful insult.  He must think of the poor excitement of
getting the paint–pot and the ladder, of watching the receding
police patrol, the tremulous triumph of smearing the hated object.
That perhaps was the poor crown of life for that particular brain.
Then the alarm, the conflict, the flight, a shot, a wound, straw
and filth in a prison cell, the beatings and the formal punishment,
the intensified resolve to carry on the resistance.  There was
nothing to think of then but the next outrage, the next riot.  So
very often the story went on to wounds and death, the body crumpled
up on a street pavement and trampled under foot or put against a
wall to be shot, and then the rotting away and dispersal of that
particular human brain with all the gifts and powers it possessed.
That was all that life could be for hundreds of thousands of those
hate–drenched brains.  For that they came into being, like flowers
that open in a rain of filth.</p><p>A Natural History of Cruelty has recently been published by Otto
Jaspers (2085—), a lineal descendant of that Professor Jaspers of
Heidelberg University under whom De Windt studied and to whose Die
geistiger Situation der Gegenwart De Windt was greatly indebted.
Cruelty in the Twentieth Century is treated in considerable detail,
and it makes very terrible reading indeed.  Happily it is not
considered a necessary part of a general education to probe under
those dark processes of the human mind which make the infliction of
horrible pain and injuries a relief to otherwise intolerable mental
distresses.  The psychologist, however, must acquaint himself with
all those facts; he cannot fully understand our intricate minds
without them, and the practical disappearance of deliberate cruelty
from our world to–day makes the horror literature of the World War
and World Slump periods a mine of essential material for his
investigations.  One or two glimpses we have given the student.  If
he has any imagination he will be able to expand those hints for
himself into an infinitude of mutilations, tortures and wanton
violence.</p><p>The older psychologists were disposed to classify cruelty as a form
of sexual aberration—in ordinary speech we still use their old
word Sadistic—but this attribution is no longer respected by
contemporary authorities.  Cruelty goes far beyond the sexual
field.  Just as hate is now understood to be a combative fear
compound, the stiffening up of a faltering challenge, which may
become infectious, so cruelty is regarded as a natural development
of effort against resistance, so soon as the apprehension of
frustration exceeds a certain limit.  It is a transformation of our
attempt to subdue something, usually a living thing, to our will,
under the exasperation of actual or anticipated obduracy.</p><p>This interpretation makes it plain why the breakdown of the private
capital economic and political system and the world–wide
uncertainty, dismay and want which ensued was followed by wave
after wave of unprecedented cruelty.  In 1900, a visitor from
another sphere might reasonably have decided that man, as one met
him in Europe or America, was a kindly, merciful and generous
creature.  In 1940 he might have decided, with an equal show of
justice, that this creature was diabolically malignant.  And yet it
was the same creature, under different conditions of stress.</p><p>There were many thousands of suicides between 1930 and 1940—
suicides of sensitive men and women, who could endure the dreadful
baseness and cruelty of life no longer.  Yet in the records of the
reviving world of 1980 there is scarcely a mention of atrocious
conduct towards human beings or animals.  It was not a change of
nature; it was a change of phase.  Millions of people who had
actually killed, massacred, tortured, were still alive—and they
were behaving now quite reasonably and well.  Most of them had
forgotten their own deeds more or less completely.  Hope had
returned to human life.  The frantic years were past.</p></section><footer/></body></html>