<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>10: The Raid of the Germs</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch02s09.xhtml" title="9: The Last War Cyclone, 1940-50"/><link rel="next" href="ch02s11.xhtml" title="11: Europe in 1960"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="10: The Raid of the Germs" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646822980"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">10: The Raid of the Germs</h2></div></div></div><p>That same dearth of detailed description which takes the colour out
of the history of the last wars becomes even more apparent in the
records of the epidemics that made any resumption of that warfare
impossible.  Diaries, letters and descriptive writing were out of
fashion; there were other things to do and no surplus energy in the
brain.  It is as if the micro–organisms had taken a leaf out of the
book of the Foreign Offices and found in mankind's confusion an
opportunity for restoring the long–lost empire of the germs.</p><p>The attack began in the best style without a declaration of war.
The first line of advance consisted of a variety of influenzas,
impoverishing fevers, that were highly infectious and impossible to
control under war conditions.  The depleted strength of the
belligerent populations, a depletion due to their reduced and
disorganised nourishment and the collapse of their sanitary
services, gave these infections full scope; they killed some
millions and diminished the already lowered vitality of the great
populations still further.  That lowering of the general vitality
was far more important than the actual mortality.  Cholera and
bubonic plague followed, and then, five years and more later, when
the worst seemed to have passed, came the culminating attack by
maculated fever.</p><p>This obscure disease, hitherto known only as a disease of captive
baboons, seems to have undergone some abrupt adaptation to the
kindred habitat of the human body; possibly there was some
intermediate host which prepared the bacilli for their attack on
mankind.  Or it may be that the preceding epidemics had changed
some hitherto defensive element in human blood.  We are still quite
in the dark upon these points because at that time there were no
doctors or biologists with the leisure to record observations, even
had they had time to make them, and scientific publications had
ceased to appear anywhere.</p><p>The disease appeared first in the vicinity of the London Zoological
Gardens and spread thence with incredible rapidity.  It discoloured
the face and skin, produced a violent fever, cutaneous irritation
and extreme mental distress, causing an uncontrollable desire to
wander.  Then the bodily energy vanished in collapse and the victim
lay down and died.  The fever was not simply infectious through
water, but transmitted by the almost impalpable scabs scratched off
by the sufferer.  Wind, water and the demented sick carried it
everywhere.  About half humanity was vulnerable, and so far as we
know now all who were vulnerable took it, and all who took it died.</p><p>So the world's malaise culminated in the terrible eighteen months
between May 1955 and November 1956, at which latter date Nature
with a pitiless but antiseptic winter came to the rescue of the
human remnant.  No effectual cure was ever devised for this
fever and no helpful palliative.  It swept the whole world and
vanished as enigmatically as it came.  It is still a riddle for
pathologists.  It no longer affects even the surviving baboon
population, so that investigators can make no cultures, nor attempt
any experiments.  There is no material.  It came, it destroyed, and
it seems to have at last committed suicide with some unknown anti–
body of its production.  Or the real disease, as Mackensen
believes, may have been not the maculated fever at all, but the
state of vulnerability to its infection.  That vulnerability had
spread unsuspected throughout the world, he thinks, in the warring
forties.  The actual pestilence was not the disease but the harvest
of a weakness already prepared.</p><p>History is like the individual memory in this, that it tends to
obliterate disagreeable experiences.  One of the most nonsensical
things that was ever said was that a country is happy that has no
history.  On the contrary, it is only the really secure and
prosperous phases that have left anything like sufficient material
for historical reconstruction.  We know of the pleasant social life
of all the centuries of abundance in Egypt; we know the greatness
and conquests of Assyria; the court–life of Ajanta and Central Asia
is pictured for us to share; but the days of military disaster
leave nothing but a band of ashes, and the years of pestilence
merely break the continuities of the record.  There is a good
account of the Plague of London (1665) written by Defoe (1659–
1731), and the unwary reader has to be warned that that account was
compiled and fabricated many years after the event by an ingenious
writer who was not even an eye–witness.  There is a painting by
Raphael of the plague in Rome which is similarly reminiscent.  Most
of the great plagues of history took their dead and departed
unportrayed.  What concerns history is the subsequent social and
economic dislocation.  On that Clio becomes copious again.  What
goes on again matters to her, but what is dead is dead.</p><p>The flowering prosperity of the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries has left us an almost uncontrollable mass of record about
people who knew nothing except by hearsay of the more frightful
experiences of mankind.  We have novels, letters, diaries, memoirs,
pictures, photographs and so on by the million.  But there survives
hardly a letter, no pictures, and not a book or newspaper to throw
light on those years 1955 and 1956, little more than a century and
a third ago, which were certainly the most terrible through which
our race ever passed.  What was written at the time was destroyed
as infectious.  Afterwards it was left for a new generation of
Defoes and Stephen Cranes to contrive a picture.</p><p>The descriptions of Cable, Nath Dass, Bodesco and Martini seem to
be fairly justifiable, and to these fictions the reader is
referred.  They ring the changes upon not only villages but towns
and cities with none but dead men and women in them; people lying
unburied and gnawed by packs of hungry dogs and solitary cats; in
India the tigers and in Africa the lions came into the desolate
streets, and in Brazil the dead population of whole districts was
eaten chiefly by wild hog, which multiplied excessively.  Rats
swarmed, and with an unwonted boldness threatened even the immune.</p><p>One terror which is never omitted is the wandering of the infected.
Nothing would induce them to remain in bed or hospital; nothing
could keep them from entering towns and houses that were as yet
immune.  Thousands of these dying wanderers were shot by terror–
stricken people whom they approached.  That dreadful necessity
horrifies us to–day as much as that other grim act of self–
protection: the survivors in the boats of the big steamship Titanic
which struck an iceberg in 1912, beating at the knuckles of the
drowning men and women who clung to the sides and threatened to
swamp them.  For awhile, under such desperate and revealing
stresses, man ceased to obey the impulses of a social animal.
Those of the population who resisted the infection—and with
maculated fever the alternatives were immunity or death—gave way
to a sort of despair and hatred against the filthy suffering around
them.  Only a few men with medical, military, priestly or police
training seem to have made head against the disaster and tried to
maintain a sort of order.  Many plundered.  On the whole, so far as
the evidence can be sifted, women behaved better than men, but some
few women who joined the looters were terrible.</p><p>This nightmare came and passed.</p><p>In January 1957, people were walking about in the deserted towns,
breaking into empty houses, returning to abandoned homes, exploring
back streets littered with gnawed bones or fully–clad skeletons,
and they were still unable to realize that the wrath of Nature was
over and life still before them.</p><p>Maculated fever had put gas warfare in its place.  It had halved
the population of the world.</p></section><footer/></body></html>