<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>12: America in Liquidation</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch02s11.xhtml" title="11: Europe in 1960"/><link rel="next" href="ch03.xhtml" title="Book the Third"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="12: America in Liquidation" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646836580"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">12: America in Liquidation</h2></div></div></div><p>The preceding sections have given a general view of the course of
history in the Old World during the middle decades of the twentieth
century.  Even in Europe certain regions, as we have noted, stand
rather aloof from the essential drama, following a line of
development of their own, less tragic and intense than that of the
leading Powers.  Spain, for example, the new Spain that was born in
1931, has the rôle of an onlooker, an onlooker much preoccupied
with his own affairs.  Still more noticeable is the non–
participation of both Latin– and English–speaking America in these
passionate and violent happenings.  They suffered parallel
economic, political and social stresses, but within their own
limits.  After the financial storms of the Early Thirties, the
shocks that came to them from the European troubles affected them
less and less.  They took up their particular aspect of the decline
and fall of private capitalism and worked it out in their own way.</p><p>Yet the fact they did share in that decline and fall brings out
very clearly a fact that was sometimes disputed in the past: the
immediate causes of the world collapse in the twentieth century
were first monetary inadaptability, secondly the disorganization of
society through increased productivity, and thirdly the great
pestilence.  War was not a direct cause.  The everyday life of man
is economic, not belligerent, and it was strangled by the creditor.
Had the world been already one state in 1900, and had it still been
an economy of private accumulation with a deflating currency, it
would have collapsed in very much the same fashion that it did
collapse.  Had it been cut up into a hundred belligerent states at
that time, but with a monetary system that restrained the creditor
and allowed industrial development without limit, it might have
released sufficient energy to have gone on with its wars for
another century or so before it reached the goal of mutual
extermination.  The monetary collapse was the most immediate factor
in the world's disorganization, enfeeblement and famine.  Without
it man might have pursued a far longer and more strenuous career to
massacre and suffocation.  On the whole it was perhaps well for him
that progress tumbled over finance in the nineteen–thirties.</p><p>The futility of all the early anti–war movements becomes
understandable only when we grasp the essential importance of a
sane monetary nexus.  On this we have insisted throughout, we have
elucidated the connexion of the creditor and traditional
antagonisms from half a dozen angles, and nothing could emphasize
and drive home the lesson more than the parallelism of the American
and Old–World experiences.</p><p>From the days of their first political separation from the European
system the American communities had gone through their own series
of developmental phases, independent of and out of rhythm with the
course of events in the Old–World.  Independent—and yet not
completely independent, because they were upon the same planet.
Throughout the nineteenth century the American mind, in north and
south alike, was saturated with the idea of ISOLATION.  It was
taught in the schools, in the Press, in every political utterance
of a general import, that the New World was indeed a new world, an
escape from the tyranny of ancient traditions to peace, liberty,
opportunity and a fresh life for mankind.  It had to avoid all
"entangling alliances" with Old–World states and policies, forget
the inveterate quarrels and hatreds of Europe even at the price of
forgetting kinship and breaking with a common culture, and work out
and set the example of a more generous way of living.  From the
days of George Washington to the days of Woodrow Wilson, in spite
of the Civil War and much grave economic trouble, the American mind
never abandoned its belief in its own exemplary quality and its
conception that towards the rest of the world its attitude must be
missionary and philanthropic.  It realized that it knew many things
very simply, but it had no doubt it knew better.</p><p>Throughout the nineteenth century both America and Europe expanded
enormously, economically, biologically.  America was profoundly
impressed by her own growth and disposed to disregard the equal
pace of European progress.  Assisted by a tremendous immigration
from Europe, the population of the United States increased by about
80 millions in a hundred years.  But in spite of that tremendous
emigration, Europe during that period added 240 millions to her
multitudes.  The American cherished a delusion that he had "got on"
relatively to Europe.  His life had in fact expanded, concurrently
with the European's, and through the working of ideas and
inventions and the importation of human energy from the older
centres.  In his unimpeded continent the different elements in the
expansion increased at rates that did not correspond with the
European process.  He was living in a similar progressive system,
but he was more and more out of phase with Transatlantic
developments.</p><p>And throughout that century inventions in transport and
communications were "abolishing distance" and bringing points that
had formerly been months apart into a few hours' or a few moments'
distance from one another.</p><p>The resulting alternations of intimacy and remoteness across the
Atlantic constitute one of the outstanding aspects of twentieth–
century history.  It is like two great and growing tops that spin
side by side.  They approach, they touch and clash, they wabble and
fly apart.  Or it is like two complexes of machinery, destined
ultimately to combine into one world mechanism, whose spinning
wheels attempt to mesh and fail to mesh and jar with a great shower
of sparks and splinters and separate again.  From the end of the
nineteenth century onward the unifying forces of life were tending
to gear America with Europe.  By the middle of the twentieth
century any observer might have been forgiven the conclusion that
the intergearing had failed.</p><p>We have already given great prominence in this history to the
figures of Henry Ford, Woodrow Wilson, and the second Roosevelt,
Franklin Roosevelt.  We have told of the magnificent advance upon
Europe and the subsequent recoil of America within and about them.
A brief but competent contemporary book by an American publicist,
Frank H. Simonds, Can America stay at Home? (1933) surveys the
question of isolation very illuminatingly as it appeared in the
opening years of the great economic slump which closed down for
good and all the wild freedoms of Acquisitive Private Capitalism.
He shows how the phases of approach and repulsion succeeded one
another from the first imperialist enterprises of Roosevelt I
(Theodore Roosevelt, 1901–1909) onward; how impossible it seemed
for America either to keep out of Old–World affairs or to mingle
frankly in them.  It expressed its virtuous opinions and would not
back them.  It insisted upon moral judgments and would not take
responsibility.  In European eyes, to quote Simonds' new historical
phrase, "American concern for peace appeared a transparent
endeavour to combine the mission of John the Baptist with the
method of Pontius Pilate."  The explanation lay in just that
mixture of liberal modernity and naive crudity in the American
intelligence on which we have laid stress.</p><p>From its beginning the American republic was a break with history,
a new thing, far newer, having regard to its period, than the
Soviet Republic of Lenin, and from its beginning it was failing to
go on with its newness, failing to develop and intensify its ideas.
It evolved a body of higher schools and cultivated men to think
itself out only after more than a century of independence; in the
interim it left its mass education to underpaid teachers and
repetitive women.  It grew bodily, immensely, and for more than a
century it lived on imported brain–food.  The result was this
rawness, this immense sense of its mission and this want of any
subtlety or vigour in its conduct.  Wilson's foolish preachments
and arrangements, so foolish and yet so saturated with the wisdom
of world peace, were perhaps the highest expression of the American
mind of his time.</p><p>The American mind even in the nineteenth century was not an
ignorant mind; it was an immensely uneducated mind.  If it was
clumsy, it was also free.  Its religious "revivalism" was exactly
parallel to its political fluctuations.  We find in the stories and
studies of authentic American life such features as camp–meetings
and organized emotional campaigns for repentance and conversion.
We think of firelit scenes, of harsh preaching and lusty chanting.
These waves of popular feeling, these gatherings, often in the
woods, with their hymn–singing, their exhortation, their shouts of
penitence and exultant belief, the mindless exaltation and the
subsequent mindless deflation of American spiritual life, were
precisely reflected in these booms and slumps of the American world
mission.  Only with the shock of world economic disaster did the
real social and political thinking of America rise to its full
vigour.  The retreat of the United States from the imbroglio of
European affairs as the great depression intensified was marked by
a new, more vigorous determination to grip the essentials of social
life.</p><p>And certainly there was everything to stimulate thought in the
internal situation.  The dégringolade was at first more rapid even
than in Europe.  The industrial edifice had been reared to giddier
heights of mass production and fell more heavily.  In 1928 the
United States of America still believed itself the most prosperous
country in the world; in 1933 its unemployed were more hopeless and
formidable than those of any other continent.  But they made no
organized effort of revolt; they had no revolutionary formula to
bring them together.  They revolted as individuals and gangs and
became criminals.  Society was not overthrown, but it crumbled
rapidly to dust and disorder.  The crime wave, the financial
stress, the frantic efforts to economize, and all the consequent
strangulation of popular education and the dissolution of
confidence, order and intercommunication—that sequence which we
have already traced in general terms manifested itself most
severely and typically in this vast, comparatively unhistorical
area.  Roosevelt II struggled gallantly but he came too late to
stop the rot.</p><p>In America as in Europe a phase of fragmentation set in.  It was
not a smash to which one can give a definite date, but every day
there was something happening in the direction of dissolution.  In
America as in Europe State governments became insolvent phantoms
making feebler and feebler efforts to collect taxes, and the
Federal authority in Washington faded away, if not as completely as
the League of Nations in Europe, at any rate in a comparable
manner.  We have the same phenomena of municipalities becoming
autonomous, and provisional controls, Citizens' Unions, Law and
Order Societies, Workers' Protection Associations and plain
Workers' Soviets (in New Mexico and Arizona) springing into
activity here, there and everywhere.  In the Blue Mountains and on
the Pacific coast small republics had already isolated themselves
in 1945 and were carrying out a strange blend of Methodism,
"Technocracy" and the Douglas Plan, and Utah had become a
practically autonomous Single–Tax State and had restored Mormonism
of the original type as the State religion.  But there had been no
formal secession from the Federal Union anywhere.</p><p>There is in the Records a description of Washington in the year
1958, by a former attaché of the British Embassy there.  (All
the Ambassadors of the British Empire had been replaced by
"consolidated consuls" in 1946.)  He describes a visit to the White
House, where he was entertained at lunch by President Benito
Caruso.  The President was carrying on although his term had
expired because his successor elect had disappeared on his way to
the capital in the Allegheny Mountains.  There had been
considerable confusion about the last election, and two Secession
Presidents who were disputing possession of the State of New York
after a conflict over the Yonkers Ballot Boxes had cut off
communications with New England altogether.</p><p>The President received his visitor very cordially and asked many
very sympathetic and intelligent questions about the European
situation.  He spoke very hopefully of the American outlook.  The
"return to Normalcy", he said, was at last in sight.  There had
been a restoration of the steamboat traffic on the Mississippi, and
cotton was going through to the north again in spite of the
political unrest.  A hundred and forty automobiles had been sent to
South America alone in the year 1956–7 in the place of only
seventy–two for the previous year.  The new quinine–coffee barter
system was working well.  He looked forward now to a steady upward
movement in business affairs.  The Hoover Slump had, he admitted,
lasted much longer and had gone much lower than had been expected,
and it had tried the people to the utmost, but they had faced their
trials in a manner worthy of the fathers of the republic.  He
concluded with the compliments usual then between the two great
divisions of the English–speaking peoples.</p><p>The lunch was plain but ample.  There was excellent pork and a
variety of vegetables which the President with genuine democratic
frankness boasted he had raised himself with the help of his negro
"secretariat" in the pig–pens and garden at the back of the White
House.  The duties of the secretariat seem to have been in the
household rather than the office.  They had been appointed for
abstruse political reasons, and several of them were unable to
read.  Mrs. Caruso, a very pleasant lady of Irish extraction, was
disposed to dwell on the difficulties of housekeeping in Washington
in view of the increasing unpunctuality in the collection of the
Federal revenue, but the President checked her, evidently
considering these domestic matters a reflection upon the solvency
of the nation.</p><p>At that time only about a third of the States were actually
represented by Congressmen in the Assembly.  The rest had found it
either too expensive or unnecessary to send delegates.  A member
was in possession of the house, a tattered individual, reciting
some lengthy grievance; there were no reporters visible, and nobody
was listening to him.  Apparently this man was trying to "talk out"
some legislative proposal, but the visitor could not find anyone
who could explain the situation precisely.</p><p>The visitor dined on the following day with the eloquent, vital and
venerable Senator Borah from Idaho (1865–1970).  He was in
excellent form, and talked throughout the meal.  Indeed, he talked
so ably that his visitor was unable to ask him several questions
previously prepared for him.  He too was extremely hopeful for his
country.  He admitted that there had been a marked decline in the
grosser welfare of America during his lifetime.  He would not
quarrel with statistics.  In tons of coal and steel, in miles of
railway run, in the mass production of motor–cars and commodities
generally, it was possible to institute unfavourable comparisons
with the past.  "But man does not live by bread alone," said
America's Grand Old Man.  "Let us look a little nearer the heart of
things."</p><p>That heart, it seemed, had never been sounder.  The pestilence,
like everything that came from God, had been "wholesome".  The
standard of life was, he maintained, higher than it ever had been,
having regard to the nobler aspects of things.  Fewer bathrooms
there might be, at least in working order, but there was far more
purity of mind.  In his younger days there had been a lamentable
lapse into luxurious indulgence and carelessness on the part of the
free people of the States, but all that was past.  America was
nearer now to the old Colonial simplicity, honesty and purity than
she had ever been.</p><p>A little inconsecutively the Senator went on to denounce the
dishonesty of Europe and the disingenuousness of European and
particularly of British diplomacy.  He seemed for a time to be
repeating long–remembered speeches and to have forgotten how
completely British diplomacy had lapsed.  He had apparently heard
the word "attaché" before he began to talk, and that had sent his
mind back to old times.  He returned to the present situation.  The
United States, he insisted, had gone through far blacker phases in
its early history.  A hundred and fifty–four years ago Washington
had been burnt by a victorious British army.  Nothing of the sort
had occurred during the present depression—if it could still be
spoken of as a depression.  Even at the darkest hour in this great
Hoover Slump nobody had ever thought of burning Washington.</p><p>Later on this same traveller visited the University of Chicago,
Columbia University, Harvard and a number of other centres of
intellectual activity.  His comments are shrewd and intelligent,
and fall in very conveniently with our examination of the mental
reactions that even then were rapidly producing a new and more
sinewy American consciousness amidst the ruins of its ancient
laxity.</p><p>These institutions were naturally in a most varied state of
adjustment to the new conditions.  Not all were progressive.
Harvard reminded him of what he had read of the ancient lamaseries
of Tibet.  There was practically no paper to be got for note–taking
or exercises, and the teaching was entirely oral and the learning
done by heart.  The libraries were closely guarded against
depredations, and the more important books were only to be
inspected in locked glass cases.  A page was turned daily.  The
teachers varied in prestige with the number of their following.
They either sat in class–rooms and under trees and lectured, or
they went for long walks discoursing as they went to a rabble of
disciples.  They varied not only in prestige but physical well–
being, because it was the rôle of these students to cultivate food
for their masters and themselves in the college grounds and produce
woven clothing and sandals in the Technical and Art Buildings.
Some literary production was going on.  The more gifted students
wrote verses on slates and these, if they were sufficiently
esteemed by the teaching staff, were written up on the walls or
ceilings of the building.  The atmosphere was one of archaic
simplicity and studied leisure.  The visitor was entertained by
President Eliot, a tall distinguished–looking elderly man in a
toga, who had inherited his position from his grandfather.  There
was a large open fire in the room, which was lit by tallow candles
which two undergraduates continually snuffed.  The President talked
very beautifully over his simple soup, his choice Maryland claret
and a cornucopia of fruit and nuts, and the conversation went on
until a late hour.</p><p>The impression of Nicholson, the visitor, was one of an elegant
impracticability.  The simple graciousness of the life he could not
deny, but it seemed to him also profoundly futile.  He seems,
however, to have concealed this opinion from the President and
allowed him to talk unchallenged of how Harvard had achieved the
ultimate purification and refinement of the Anglican culture, that
blend of classicism and refined Christianity, with a graceful
monarchist devotion.</p><p>"There is a King here?" asked the visitor.</p><p>"Not actually a King," said the President regretfully.  "We have
decided that the Declaration of Independence is inoperative, but we
have been unable to locate the legitimate King of England, and so
there has been no personal confirmation of our attitude.  But we
have an attitude of loyalty.  We cherish that."</p><p>The chief subjects of study seem to have been the Ptolemaic
cosmogony, the Homeric poems, the authentic plays of Shakespeare
and theology.  The scanty leisure of the students did not admit of
a very high standard of gymnastics, and they seem to have abandoned
those typical American college sports of baseball and football
altogether.  The President spoke of these games as "late
innovations".  One chief out–of–door employment seems to have been
wood–cutting and felling.</p><p>This glimpse of graceful and idealistic pedantry is interesting
because it left so few traces for later times.  It depended very
much on the personality of the President himself, and after his
death at an advanced age, and the hard winters of 1981 and 1983,
this ancient foundation seems to have been completely deserted and
allowed to fall into ruin.</p><p>Both Columbia University and Chicago were in violent contrast to
Harvard.  Here the influence of the new De Windt school of thought
was very evident, and the traditions of Dewey, Robinson, Harry
Elmer Barnes, Raymond Fosdick, the Beard couple and their
associates were still alive.  Although New York City was already
abandoned and dangerous because of the instability of its huge
unoccupied skyscrapers, there was still considerable trading on the
Hudson River and some manufacturing activity.  The great iron
bridges were still quite practicable for pack horses and mules,
and, affording as they did a North and South line of communication
of quite primary value, they gave the place a unique commercial
importance.  The industrial workers there and in Chicago were in
close contact with the college staffs, and they were working with
very great energy at what they called "The General Problem of
Recovery".</p><p>"They don't", writes Nicholson, "admit that civilization has broken
down.  They talk here just as they did in Washington, of the Hoover
Slump.  I never met people so confident that somehow and in some
fashion things will pick up again.  There is nothing like this at
home.  One night there was a tremendous crash and an earthquake.  A
huge pile called 'Radio City' had collapsed in the night.  In the
bright keen morning I went out to the Pantheon, and there a crowd
of people was watching the clouds of dust that were still rising,
and listening to the occasional concussions that marked minor
fallings–in.  Were they in the least downhearted?  Not at all.
'There's a bit more liquidation,' said a man near me.  'We have to
get these things off our hands somehow.'"</p><p>Nicholson gives a fairly full account of the curricula of both
Columbia and Chicago.  He is greatly struck by the equipment of the
scientific laboratories and the relative importance of experimental
work.  "I felt almost as though I was back in 1930," he says, "when
I visited the Rockefeller chemical laboratory."  But still more was
he struck by the advanced state of the sociological work.  "They
are producing a sort of lawyers who are not litigators," he writes.
"I think the new law stuff they are doing here is the most
interesting thing about the place.  It isn't what my father would
have recognized as law at all.  It's the physiology and pathology
of society and social therapeutics arising therefrom.  There are
one or two men here, Hooper Hamilton and Rin Kay for instance,
whose talk is a liberal education.  They won't hear any of the rot
we deal out at home about the Sunset of Mankind."</p><p>That was his key observation, so to speak.  But it is interesting
to note that the reduction of Basic English to practicable use was
also being made.  Spanish and English were already on their way to
become the interchangeable languages they remained throughout all
the earlier twenty–first century.  The teaching of French had
fallen off very greatly, and the old classical studies (Greek and
Latin) to judge by his complete silence about them, had been
completely abandoned.</p><p>Our tourist flew from Chicago to the Ford Aerodrome at Dearborn,
saw the ruins of the main factories and the reconstructed
settlement, and spent some days with the Technological School there
and in the still very imperfectly arranged Museum of American Life.
It was startling to see some scores of square miles of closely
cultivated land round the open space of the Aerodrome and to learn
that an old Ford idea of dividing the time of the staff between
agricultural production and mechanical work was still in effective
operation.  There were associated textile and boot factories in
Detroit.  There was still an output of some thousand–odd
automobiles a year and a "few hundred" (!) aeroplanes.  And there
was a small but healthy radio department.</p><p>"We keep in touch," said the Director.  "We don't interfere with
people, and we are not interfered with.  We are running all that is
left of the distance letter post….  Yes, Canada and Mexico as
well.  Nobody bothers us now about the boundaries, and we don't
bother.  When trade was at its worst we sat tight, cultivated our
farms, and did experiments."</p><p>The Henry Ford, that "great original" whose adventure of the Peace
Ship has been chosen to mark a turning–point in our history, had
long since played out his part, but the Director mentioned in these
papers seems to have been his son Edsel, carrying on the
initiatives of his finely simple–minded parent.</p><p>That the place was able to "sit tight and carry on" was no empty
boast.  The visitor from a slovenly world dwells on the "tidiness"
of everything.  The Edison workshop was still in the original state
as it had been re–erected by Henry Ford; there or in the Museum
Nicholson was shown the first phonograph and the first telephone
ever made, and the earliest experimental automobiles and
aeroplanes.</p><p>"It is as recent as that," he tells us he said.  "In the lifetime
of ourselves and our fathers we have seen the beginning, the
triumph, and the collapse of the greatest civilization that the
world has ever seen.  We have spanned the whole history of
mechanical mass production."</p><p>"Not a bit of it," said the Director.  "It's hardly begun."</p><p>There followed a long conversation the gist of which the visitor
seems to have written down immediately in dialogue form.  Its
interest for the student of history lies in the fact that here
again we have evidence of the way in which amidst the world–wide
collapse into misery, disorder and incoherent peasant life the
vitality of the mechanical transport system was manifesting itself.
We can put the talk of the Dearborn director side by side with that
of the European aviator reported by Titus Cobbett.  There is the
same realization of the final death of the old order.  "All that
king business and congress business is as dead as mutton," said the
Dearborn director.  "And the banking business is deader."</p><p>"And what is coming?" asked the visitor.</p><p>"THAT," said the director, and pointed to a mounting aeroplane
inaudible and almost invisible in the blue.</p></section><footer/></body></html>