<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>7: The Modern State and Germany</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch02s06.xhtml" title="6: The Western Grip on Asia Relaxes"/><link rel="next" href="ch02s08.xhtml" title="8: A Note on Hate and Cruelty"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="7: The Modern State and Germany" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646758520"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">7: The Modern State and Germany</h2></div></div></div><p>A question of primary importance in human history is this:  Why
were the lessons of the Great War, and the subsequent economic and
social disorders, lessons which seem to us to–day to be as starkly
plain as lessons could be—why were these lessons lost upon every
one of the great communities of thought into which the world was
divided?  British thought, French thought, American thought,
German, Russian, Italian thought, seem in our retrospect to ring
the changes upon every conceivable sequence of prejudice and
stupidity.  Why was Wilson's start towards world unification not
followed up?  Why after 1932 was there no vigour to reconstruct the
League of Nations, when all the world was crying for some central
authority to unify money and economic life?  Why did the Age of
Frustration last so long?  We have already noted some of the
controlling causes, the mercenary Press, the vast anti–social
private interests, the heavy weight of tradition, the reactionary
quality of schoolmasters, the social disintegration due to economic
demoralization.  But even these malignant influences, taken all
together, do not seem sufficient for this blindness in the general
intelligence of our race towards the obvious elements of its
situation.</p><p>Behind all these conditions making for failure there was
something else: there was an intrinsic weakness in the forces of
reconstruction, there was a fundamental lack.  It was impossible
for the world to get out of its difficulties because it had no
definite complete idea of what it wanted to get out to.  It had
ideas, yes, more than enough, but they were confused and often
mutually contradictory ideas.  A drowning man cannot save himself
by swimming unless he has something solid to which he can swim.
The deficiency was not moral nor material, it was intellectual.
There was the will for salvation and the material for salvation,
but there was no plan of salvation.  The world has no definition of
an objective.  That had still to be made plain to it.</p><p>It will make this matter clearer if we consider the mental and
emotional phases of one typical culture community of central
importance at that time, the German.  Stories similar in essence,
if widely different in detail, could be given of the French, Anglo–
Saxon, Russian and Spanish–speaking communities.  The feature they
had in common was this, a failure to realize that there could be no
salvation now unless it was a comprehensive salvation.  They were
attempting to do severally and with a jostling competitiveness what
could only be done with the utmost difficulty in unison.  That
meant for every one of them the paralysing influence of a war
threat, extreme economic instability, incapacity for dealing with
morbid financial conditions, and a consequent state of mental
"worry" that made every move inaccurate and untimely.</p><p>It is only when we realize the sapping of that aggressive energy
that had well–nigh Europeanized the whole world before the World
War that we can understand the length of the Age of Frustration.
Certain facts of fundamental importance to the continued health of
our world community have to be stressed.  Europe could not lead the
world to unity when the world seemed dying to be led to unity,
because Europe itself was profoundly disunited.  The World War was
merely the explosion of tensions that had been straining below the
surface throughout the whole First Period of World Prosperity.
Before the European peoples, who by 1920 amounted to a quarter of
the whole human race, could resume the exploring, experimenting and
civilizing rôle they had played for two centuries, it was necessary
that they should be purged of a chronic mental disease—a disease
which had, it seemed, to rise to an acute phase and run its
enfeebling and devastating course before it could be treated: the
disease of hate.</p><p>Although each year in the Thirties saw the international tension in
Europe increasing, it was only in 1940 that actual warfare broke
out.  All Europe was "mined" for ten years before that time, but
the very consciousness of that fact, if it did not hold back the
drift towards war, increased the gravity of its onset.  That
ingenious contrivance of President Wilson's, the Polish Corridor,
Poland's "access to the sea", was the particular mine that exploded
first.  But it was only one of a series of accumulating detonations
which were destined to blow the still creaking ineffective League
of Nations, and indeed nearly every vestige of the unfortunate
Treaty of Versailles and its subordinate "settlements", out of the
way of human readjustment.</p><p>The mental phases of that great body of Europeans who used the
German language summarize the world situation.  The history of
Europe from 1900 to 1950 could be told in a study of the German
brain alone, its torment and the reactions it evoked in the peoples
about it.  It was a brain of outstanding vigour and crudity.  It
aroused admiration, envy and fear.  Its achievements in material
science were magnificent; its energy of industrial organization was
unparalleled.  Its mathematical and psychological ineptitudes were
redeemed by the Jewish intelligences entangled in its meshes.
Compared with the Anglo–Saxon brain its political thought was
unsupple, and it had neither the extreme lucidity of the French
intelligence, the boldness of the Italian, nor the poetic power of
Spain and Russia.  It had these conspicuous limitations.  Its
obstinate association with a stupidly arrogant monarchism and a
woolly tangle of preposterous racial pretensions stood in the way
of sympathetic cooperation with any other cultural system.  It had
failed conspicuously to assimilate the non–German subject
populations involved in its political web.  It had intensified the
defensive nationalism of the French; its tactless challenge upon
the sea had terrified and exasperated the British; it had roused
even America to a wary disapproval and a final hostility.  Russia
it had never won, but then in the huge carcass of pre–revolutionary
Russia there was very little to be won anyhow.  (There was indeed
no real national self–consciousness in Russia before the Soviet
régime; there was only Dostoievsky and the Tzar.)  Assertive
ungraciousness had been the chief factor in Germany's isolation and
the cause of its defeat in the World War.</p><p>Yet after defeat this afflicted German mentality, if only on
account of a certain toughness and vigour it possessed, remained
still the central reality and the central perplexity of the
European system.  War and disaster could not alter the fact that
the backbone of Europe, the most skilled, industrious, teachable
and intelligent block of its population, spoke and thought German.
What might happen to it, what would happen to it, should have been
the primary preoccupation of every intelligent statesman.  For if
Germany had gone right everything would have gone right.  But there
were no statesmen sufficiently intelligent to consider anything of
the sort.  Germany had had a phase of pride and megalomania.  It
had been immensely disillusioned, it had thrown off its glittering
imperialist headship, it had accepted military defeat.  It had even
passed through a phase of humility.  At first it did not hate
conspicuously.  Amidst great difficulties the new republic
displayed creative courage, moderation, a dawning sense of the
significance of world politics.</p><p>Creative, forward–looking minds turned to Germany with an entirely
pathetic hopefulness.  "Now we shall see what Germany can do," they
said.  "Be patient with Germany."  All the world scolded France for
her inveterate distrust.  Given courage and generosity abroad and
leadership at home this great mass of Teutonic brains might have
taken up the task of the Modern State then, and fallen into
cooperation with the rest of a disillusioned but renascent world.
It might even have led in the work of reconstruction, and 1918
might have been the opening year of a phase of world renewal.</p><p>But that was not to be.  The world had still to reap a harvest of
disunion through sixty tragic years.  At home leadership came to
Germany too late.  Stresemann mastered his lesson too slowly and
died too soon.  Brüning was betrayed by Hindenburg's mental decay.
And abroad it seemed to the Germans that there was nothing but war–
strained and vindictive enemies.  They looked for friends and saw
only Foreign Offices.  We have told already how the rôle of only
sinner in a world of outraged saints was thrust upon Germany by the
Conference of Versailles.  She was to be permanently enfeebled,
restrained and humiliated.  German babies yet unborn were expected
to be born penitent about the war.  They were to gasp for their
first breath under the smacks of an unforgiving world.</p><p>How all the good effort in Germany was thwarted, how the nets of
suspicion held her down, would make a long and intricate story.  At
last these losers of the World War became as violent and frantic as
stifled creatures fighting for air.  Only by a feat of imagination
can we now put ourselves in their places.  Everything seemed to be
making for the strangulation of Central Europe.  The young
energetic men in the defeated countries were to be given no share
in the rebuilding of their shattered world.  That was to be
reserved for the new generation of the conquerors.  They were to
live in an atmosphere of punishment, toiling, heavily taxed, and
outlawed from the advancement of civilization to the very end of
their days.  That they should recover prosperity or achieve great
things would be an offence.</p><p>Naturally life so circumscribed was bitter and lapsed very easily
towards vice, apathy or blind revolt.  There is a remarkable novel
in the Historical Documents Series (Fabian, by Erich Kastner, 1932)
which renders the individual aspect of this phase of German life
very vividly.  Another novel almost equally vivid and illuminating
is Kleiner Mann, was nun? by Hans Fallada, 1932.</p><p>These conditions of mind, this tied and stifled outlook upon life,
were, it must be admitted, by no means confined to the German–
speaking peoples.  The intelligent and ambitious young Indian or
Egyptian or negro, the intelligent young man of any subordinated,
handicapped and restrained people or class—and this covered
perhaps two–thirds of the youth of our race in these days—
participated in the same distress of a foreordained inferiority and
futility.  But the young German had recent memories of hope and
pride and a greater fund of resentment and aggressive energy.  He
had no tradition of inferiority and subservient adjustment.</p><p>Unhappily no teachers or leaders arose to point him on to his
legitimate rôle in the replacement of the current disorder by the
Modern World State.  The Hohenzollern régime and the stresses of
the war had stood in the way of his attaining anything like the
cosmopolitanism of, say, the English and Americans.  His new
republicanism was superficial and half–hearted, and in the schools
and universities the teachers and leaders of the old militarist
régime were still living, active and malignant.  The Press and all
the organizations of instruction and suggestion stood out of the
revolution and showed themselves only too eager and skilful in
restoring a pre–war fierceness.  The futility of the new Germany
was their text.  "This is not German" they insisted.  "Go back to
the old Imperialism," they said, "and try again."  The spirit of
the women about the new generation, mothers and sweethearts alike,
was for the most part one of passionate indignation.</p><p>An acute contemporary observer, L. B. Namier, pointed out that it
was almost a law in history that war–strained and defeated
countries should relapse towards violent patriotism between twelve
and fifteen years after the war in which they suffered concluded.
He suggested that this was precisely the time when the children
who, without any participation in the realities of warfare, had
felt all the strain and bitterness of defeat and all the hatred of
the enemy would have grown up to manhood.  These children became
the energetic stratum in the population by 1933.</p><p>It was at this phase in European history that the rise of Hitlerism
occurred.  Adolf Hitler, as the decisive product of Germany in
labour, is one of the most incredible figures in the whole of
history.  He must have astonished even the teachers and writers who
had evoked him.  We can study his personal presence from a hundred
different angles in Vol. 30112 of the Historical Portrait Gallery,
and it is that of an entirely commonplace man, void of dignity,
void of fine quality.  We can hear his voice, we can hear him
persuading, exhorting and attempting to reason from the numerous
steel–tape records that were made of his speeches.  It is a
raucous, strained voice, talking violently but incoherently.  It is
the voice of a vulgar, limited, illiterate man, lashing himself to
fierceness, shouting, threatening, beating his fists at the window,
smashing the furniture about him, to escape from perplexity and
despair.  He was perfectly simple and honest in his quality.  And
that was perhaps the secret of his career.  He gave vent to the
German overstrain.  He is the voice of Germany losing control.</p><p>He denounced foreigners, Jews, Cosmopolitans, Communists,
Republicans, owners of property and leaders in finance with raucous
impartiality, and nothing is so pleasing to perplexed unhappy
people as the denunciation of others.  Not their fault, their
troubles.  They have been betrayed.  To Fallada's question, "Little
Man, what now?" his answer was, "Massacre Jews, expel foreigners,
arm and get more arms, be German, utterly German, and increase and
multiply."</p><p>One has to remember that he never carried with him even an absolute
voting majority of the German public.  But the people permitted him
to seize power and shatter their republic, stifle public discussion
and destroy their liberties.  They had no energy to resist him.
They had no conception left in their fagged and hope–starved brains
of any finer rôle than that which his bawling nationalism, his
violent campaign against Communists and imaginary Communistic
plots, against Jews, speculators and Liberals, presented to them.
The treason of the senile Hindenburg to the Republic that had
trusted him, conduced inestimably to the adventurer's success.</p><p>Hitler's exploit in seizing Germany and turning it back towards
reaction was modelled on Mussolini's precedent.  But intellectually
he was far inferior to that strange figure.  He took all that was
worst in the Fascist régime and never rose to the real constructive
effort or the competent industry of his prototype.  One little
point that illustrates his general ignorance and essential feeble–
mindedness was the adoption of the Swastika, the running cross, as
the emblem of his Nazis.  This brisk, silly little sign is of very
old origin, and, as we have noted in the earlier stages of this
summary of history, its ornamental use was one of the associated
characteristics of that type of Neolithic culture, that culture of
brownish and dark–white warm–water peoples, from which the early
civilizations sprang.  It is hardly known in connexion with the so–
called "Nordics" or with the negro peoples, and it is in no way
expressive of an "Aryan" culture.  Old writers used to declare it
was the "symbol" of the sun, but it seems to have signified little
beyond a certain cheerfulness.  It took the place of an idea in the
muddled heads of the Nazis and they treated it with immense
solemnity and wore it on their banners, clothes, proclamations and
wherever else they could.  Arden Essenden, when it was revived in
Europe during the struggle for the air control, called it the
"idiot's own trade mark", and it has certainly had a fatal
attraction for many second–rate imaginative types.</p><p>So for a time, under a hubbub of young blackguards in brown shirts
and Swastika badges, Germany, just when her rather heavy but
persistent and faithful mind would have been of primary value in
mankind's struggle with the world problem, passed out of the
intellectual commonweal of mankind.  Her real mind went into exile,
in America, in England, in Switzerland, in irony or in hiding.
She missed her proper share in the unification of mankind in
the twentieth century, just as she missed her share in the
Europeanization of the world in the eighteenth and nineteenth.  At
home this National Socialism sought destructively to construct,
sought to restore her former scientific prestige and industrial
efficiency by boasting, exhortation, intolerance, outrage and
compulsion.  It was a pitiful and tragic phase, the dementia of a
great nation.  The story of German life during this interval is a
rowdy and unhappy story—a story of faction fights and street
encounters, demonstrations and counter–demonstrations, of a
complicating tyranny of blackmailing officials, and at last of an
ill managed and unsuccessful war, that belied the innate
orderliness of the Teutonic peoples.  There was a progressive
increase of secret vice and furtive dishonesty, the outcome of
hopelessness.  The number of people killed or seriously injured in
riots and civil conflicts in Germany, or murdered for political
reasons, between 1932 and 1936 amounted to something over rather
than under thirty thousand.</p></section><footer/></body></html>