<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>3: Disintegration and Crystallization in the Social Magma. the Gangster and Militant Political Organizations</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch02s02.xhtml" title="2: The Sloughing of the Old Educational Tradition"/><link rel="next" href="ch02s04.xhtml" title="4: Changes in War Practice After the World War"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="3: Disintegration and Crystallization in the Social Magma. the Gangster and Militant Political Organizations" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646689220"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">3: Disintegration and Crystallization in the Social Magma. the Gangster and Militant Political Organizations</h2></div></div></div><p>The dissolutions and regroupings of people that were going on
through this period have always attracted the attention of the
social philosopher.  The common man had lost his faith in a
friendly God, his confidence in social justice and his educational
and social services.  He was out of employment and stirred by
unsatisfied appetites.  The time–honoured life of work and family
interests had become impossible for a growing majority.</p><p>What we now call social nucleation was failing; the grouping of
human beings in families and working communities was not going on.
They became restive and troublesome.  The social confidence and
discipline that had prevailed throughout the nineteenth century
deteriorated very rapidly.  There was a swift fall in social
security.</p><p>Phases of fever have occurred time without number in human history,
phases of unsettlement and confused motivation, clottings and
drives and migrations of population.  Periods of tranquil assurance
are the exception throughout the ages.  But in the past it has
usually been the exhaustion of food supplies, pestilence or some
cruel invasion that has broken up the social texture and made
humanity lawless again.  This new disintegration was of a different
character.  It was due in the first place to an increase rather
than a diminution of material and energy in the social scheme.  It
was a process of expansion which went wrong through the inadequacy
of traditional law and government.</p><p>The disintegrative forces were already evident in the eighteenth
century; they became very conspicuous in the French Revolution and
the subsequent social and political disturbances but they only rose
to a plain domination of the controlling forces after the World
War.</p><p>In the seventeenth century, when population was thin and hardly
anyone moved about, it had been possible to keep order by means of
a village constable, to try the malefactor by a local magistrate
and jury which knew him thoroughly and understood his position and
motives.  Dogberry and Shallow sufficed.  But the economic growth
of the eighteenth century increased the size of towns and the
traffic on the newly made roads between them without any
corresponding increase in the forces of order.  It produced,
therefore, the urban mob, the footpad, the highwayman and the
brigand.  The local constable was unequal to these new demands; the
local magistrate as inadequate.  There was a phase of increasing
crime.</p><p>After the failure of a régime of savage punishment uncertainly
inflicted, after the excesses of the first French Revolution, after
phases of mob violence in every European capital, and endless other
manifestations of this outpacing of social control, the machinery
of government did by an effort adjust itself to the new conditions.
More or less modernized police forces appeared throughout the world
and inaugurated a new phase of order and security, a phase which
reached its maximum in the years before the Great War.  For a time
then the world, or at any rate very considerable areas of it, was
almost as safe as it is today.  An unarmed man could go about in
reasonable security in most of Europe, India, China, America.
Nobody offered him violence or attempted open robbery.  Even the
policeman in the English–speaking and Western European communities
carried no weapon but a truncheon.</p><p>But the World War broke down many of the inhibitions of violence
and bloodshed that had been built up during the progressive years
of the nineteenth century and an accumulating number of
intelligent, restless unemployed men, in a new world of motor–cars,
telephones, plate–glass shop windows, unbarred country houses and
trustful social habits, found themselves faced with illegal
opportunities far more attractive than any legal behaviour–system
now afforded them.  And now after the world slump that insanity of
public economy which runs like a disease through the story of the
age prevented any prompt enlargement and modernization of the
existing educational, legal or police organizations.  The scale and
prestige of the law–court and police–court dwindled as the problems
presented to them by the vast irregular developments of that period
of stress and perplexity increased.</p><p>So the stage was set for a lawless phase.  The criminal was
liberated from parochialism and reactionary economies long before
his antagonist the policeman, and he experienced all the
invigoration and enlargement of that release.  The criminal grew
big while the law, pot–bound in its traditional swathings, was
unable to keep pace with him.</p><p>The criminal records of this disorderly interlude make strange
reading today.  Things that were terrible enough at the time appear
to us now as they recede into the past through a thickening, highly
retractile veil of grotesqueness and picturesque absurdity.  We
read about them, as we read about mediæval tortures or cannibal
feasts or war atrocities or human sacrifice, with a startled
incredulity.  We laugh now; it is all so IMPOSSIBLE.  Few of us
actually realize these were flesh–and–blood sufferings that living
men and women went through only a century and a half ago.</p><p>The criminals of the more fortunate countries of the European
system, during that First Age of General Prosperity before the
World War, like the few cases of intolerable behaviour with which
society deals today, had constituted a small abnormal and
diminishing minority for the most part mental defectives or at best
very inferior types.  The majority of their offences were emotional
or brutish offences.  There was some stealing and a steady
proportion of swindling in business, not sufficient to disturb the
social order at all seriously.  But as the morale of the old order
dissolved, this ceased to be the case.  Increasing numbers of
intelligent and enterprising people found themselves in conflict
with society because, as they argued very reasonably, society had
cheated them.  Patriotism too, they felt, had cheated them and
given them nothing but poverty and war.  They had never had a fair
chance.  They looked after themselves and left the community to
look after itself.  They fell back on the nearer loyalties of their
immediate associates.</p><p>Your "pal" at any rate was close at hand.  If he "let you down",
you had a fair chance to "get at" him.  Little gang–nuclei came
into existence, therefore, wherever unassimilated elements of the
population were congested and humiliated or wherever intelligent
men festered in unemployment and need.</p><p>In 1900 European society in particular was still nucleated about
the family group in relation to a generally understood code of
lawful behaviour.  In 1950 its individuals were either nucleated
into gangs, groups or societies or dissolved into crowds, and the
influence and pretence of any universally valid standard of good
conduct had disappeared.</p><p>Robbery is the first great division in the catalogue of anti–social
offences.  Every efficient government in the past reserved to
itself the sole right of dispossession, and every intelligent
government exercised the right with extreme discretion.  In the
past of unregulated private ownership the filching of portable
objects and raids upon unguarded possessions were always going on.
In Great Britain, in which country the highest levels of social
order were attained during the First Age of General Prosperity,
stealing (with which we may include various forms of embezzlement
and fraud) remained the chief offence upon the list.  Almost all
the others had become exceptional.  But whenever there was a dip in
the common prosperity, more active methods of robbery appeared to
supplement the ordinary theft.  The snatcher began to take his
chance with bags and watches.  The enterprise of the burglar
increased.  Then came the simple hold–up under threats, or robbery
with assault.  In a world of general confidence, unarmed and
unaccompanied people were going about everywhere wearing valuable
jewellery and carrying considerable sums of money.  But that
atmosphere of confidence could be rapidly chilled.  Even in later–
nineteenth–century Britain there were epidemics of robbery by
single men or by men in couples, the "garrotters" of the sixties,
for example, who assaulted suddenly from behind and seized the
watch and pocket–book.  They would clap a pitch plaster over their
victim's mouth.  There were brief phases when the suburban regions
even of London and Paris became unsafe, and at no time were any but
the more central regions of some of the great American cities
secure.  This kind of thing increased notably everywhere after the
World War.</p><p>There were manifest limits to this hold–up business.  It was
something that extinguished itself.  There had to be a general
feeling of practical security for that type of robbery to prosper.
There had to be people to rob.  Robbery from the person is an acute
and not a chronic disease of communities.  So soon as the footpad
became too prevalent people ceased to carry so many valuables, they
shunned lonely or dark streets and roads, they went about in
company and began to bear arms.  The epidemic of hold–ups passed
its maximum and declined.</p><p>The criminally disposed soon learnt the importance of association
for the exploitation of new lines of effort.  With a more alert and
defensive and less solitary type of victim, the casual criminal
developed into the planning criminal.  In every country multiplying
nuclei of crime began to work out the problems of that terroristic
gang discipline which is imperative upon those who combine to defy
the law.  In Europe the intensifying tariff wars put an increasing
premium upon the enterprise of the smuggler, and in smuggling
enterprises men readily developed those furtive secret loyalties,
those sub–laws of the underworld, which proved so readily
applicable to more aggressive efforts.  In America the repressive
laws against alcohol had already created the necessary conditions
for a similar morbid organization of gang systems, which had become
readily confluent with the older associations for political
corruption and terrorism.  As the economic breakdown proceeded
throughout the thirties and forties of the twentieth century,
ordinary social security diminished even more rapidly in America
than in Europe.  But everywhere a parallel dégringolade was going
on.  Now it would be the criminal forces in one country and now
those in another which were leading in novel attacks upon the law–
abiding citizen of the decaying order.</p><p>The hold–up in force became bolder and more frequent.  History
repeated itself with variations.  In the place of the highwayman of
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries came the motor–car bandit
and the train–robber.  Trains–de–luxe were successfully held up by
armed bands, first of all in Eastern Europe and America and then
very generally.  These were operations involving the concerted
action of a dozen men or more, who had to be sure of their "get
away" and with a market for their loot.  Country houses and country
clubs full of wealthy guests presently began to be attacked—the
telephones cut and the whole place systematically looted.
Restaurants, gambling–clubs and other resorts of people with full
pocket–books were also raided with increasing efficiency.  Local
banks and bank branches became insecure.  Until the nineteen–
thirties a town bank had a large open handsome office with swinging
doors, low counters and glass partitions.  Ten years later the face
of the bank had changed: the clerks were protected by steel
defences, they were armed with revolvers, and they parleyed with
the customer through small pigeonholes that could be promptly
closed.</p><p>This change in the scale and quality of aggressive crime was
reflected in public manners and display.  The wearing of jewellery,
gold watch–chains, expensive studs and suchlike challenges to
poverty declined, costume became more "buttoned up" and restrained.
Hip–pocket weapons spread from America to Europe.  Women's dress
and ornaments, though if anything they improved in their artistic
quality, diminished in intrinsic value.  Everywhere there was a
diminution of social ostentation.  Houses with narrow exterior
windows and well equipped with steel doors, locks, bolts and bars,
were preferred to those candidly exposed to sunlight and exterior
observation.  The window displays of the town shops became more
guarded.</p><p>The need for protection and the dread of conspicuousness affected
automobile design.  The common automobile of the middle twentieth
century was a sullen–looking pugnacious beast.  And its occupants
were in harmony with it.  Before the World War the spectacle of a
broken–down vehicle or any such trouble by the wayside would induce
almost any passing car to stop and offer assistance.  Under the new
conditions people feared a decoy.  They would refuse to stop after
twilight, and even in the daytime they sometimes hurried on, though
injured or apparently injured people might be lying by the
roadside.</p><p>Travel diminished very rapidly under such conditions.  There is
some difficulty about the statistics, but between 1928 and 1938 the
number of pleasure travellers upon the roads and railways of
continental Europe fell by something over, rather than under,
eighty per cent.  There were, of course, other causes at work
besides the general insecurity of movement in producing this
decline; there was a general impoverishment also which disposed
people to stay at home.  But the major factor was insecurity.</p><p>The roads were less and less frequented as they became unsafe.
Many fell out of repair, and the old road–signs and petrol pumps,
now dear to our school–museum collectors, vanished one by one from
the landscape.</p><p>Improvements in robbery were only one group of the criminal
developments in progress.  A much more distressful aspect was the
organization of terroristic blackmail, at first directed against
individuals and then against whole classes in the community.  As
people ceased to travel to be robbed, the robber had to pursue them
to their homes.  Here again American inventiveness and enterprise
led the world.  By imperceptible degrees the ordinary prosperous
citizen found his life enmeshed in a tangle of threats and vague
anxieties.  Even during the prosperous period there had been an
element of menace in the lives of the American well–to–do; their
securities had never been quite secure and their positions never
perfectly stable.  But now over and above the ever increasing
instability of possessions and income came the increasing need to
buy off molestation.  Breaking through the now inadequate
protection of the police appeared silently and grimly and more and
more openly the blackmailer, the kidnapper and the gang terrorist.</p><p>A particularly cruel form of attack upon unprotected private people
was the threatening and kidnapping of young children.  It had a
minor grotesque side in the stealing and ransoming of pet animals.
Many hundreds of children had been stolen, hidden away, and brought
back for reward before the abduction and murder of the child of
Colonel Lindbergh, a long–distance aviator very popular in America,
called general attention to this increasing nuisance.  Nothing
effective, however, was done to control these practices, and in the
bad years that followed 1930 kidnapping and the threat of
kidnapping increased very greatly, and spread to the old world.  It
was organised.  Men and women were spirited away, intimidated by
threats of torture, held captive.  If the pursuit was pressed too
hard they disappeared and were heard of no more.  Assassinations
multiplied.  Bodies of men set themselves up almost without
concealment under such names as Citizens' Protection Societies, or
Civil Order Associations.  The man who wanted to be left alone in
peace, he and his household, was pressed to pay his tribute to the
gang.  Or he would not be left in peace.  And even if his
particular "protectors" left him in peace, there might still be
other gangs about for whom they disavowed responsibility and with
whom he had to make a separate deal.</p><p>It was not merely the well–to–do who were worried and levied upon
in this fashion.  An increasing proportion of minor workers and
traders found it necessary to pay a percentage of their gains or
earnings to escape systematic persecution.  "Trouble" was the
characteristic American word.  "You don't want to have trouble,"
said the blackmailer, gently but insistently.</p><p>The new generation grew up into a world of secret compromises and
underhand surrenders.  The common man picked his way discreetly
through a world of possible trouble.  No one dared live who was not
a member (and servant) of a Union of some kind.  It was a return to
very ancient conditions, conditions that had prevailed for ages in
China, for instance, and in Sicily and Southern Italy.  But it was
a relapse from the freedom and confidence of the better days at the
close of the nineteenth century.  It was a contraction of everyday
human happiness.</p><p>Kidnapping was not confined to kidnapping for ransom.  There had
always been a certain irrepressible trade in the beguiling and
stealing of young persons for sexual prostitution, and this also
increased again.  Workers were kidnapped, and the intimidation of
workers in factories became bolder and less formally legal.  There
was a great release of violence in personal quarrels, and in
particular crimes of revenge multiplied.  In a phase of dwindling
confidence and happiness, people of spirit no longer recoiled from
the tragic ending of oppressive situations.  They took the law into
their own hands.  They began to fight and kill, and they were no
longer inevitably overtaken by the law.</p><p>The remaining rich, the financial adventurers who still appeared,
the prominent political leaders, the transitory "kings" of the
underworld, all surrounded themselves with bodyguards.  Types
recalling the hired "bravos" of the Italian cities of the later
Middle Ages and the Samurai of the Japanese noblemen reappeared as
the hefty private attendants of the wealthier Americans.  After the
economic slump had fairly set in the posse of needy retainers
became a universal practice with all who could afford it.  They
protected the person and the home.  They supplemented the police.</p><p>The transition from a protective to an aggressive bodyguard was
inevitable.  Leading American bootleggers were the chief offenders,
but the example was contagious.  "Brawling" of retainers reappeared
first in America, Germany and Ireland.  These brawls were usually
small street battles, or conflicts at race meetings and suchlike
gatherings, or side issues to political meetings and processions.
It was a courageous politician who would face an audience after
1938 unless he knew that his men were about him and posted at
strategically important points in the meeting.  And he would be
wearing a mail undervest or suchlike protection of his more vital
parts.  There are hundreds of such garments in our museums.</p><p>No man, woman or child that "mattered" went about "unshadowed"
after 1940.  After the middle nineteenth century women had made
great advances toward personal freedom.  About 1912 a pretty girl
in her teens might have taken a knapsack and marched off alone
through the northern states of Europe or America in perfect safety,
unmolested.  All this freedom vanished during the age of
insecurity.  Women ceased to go about without an escort even in the
towns.  It was not until 2014 that there was any real return
towards the former common liberties of the young and weak and
gentle.  There was on the part of women, as the novels of the time
reveal, a survival of social fear in human life, the fear of going
alone, until the middle of the twenty–first century.</p><p>After 1945 a fresh aspect of insecurity appears in the records.
There is mention of unsafe roadside hotels, and a great increase
not simply of streets, but of whole districts and villages where
"things happened", people disappeared, and it was inadvisable for
strangers to go.  Some of these criminally infected areas did not
recover their reputations for three quarters of a century.  The
DANGEROUS big hotel with its secret lifts, passages, ambushes and
sinister private rooms is still the delight of our popular
romancers; it loses nothing in elaboration as it recedes into the
past.</p><p>The psychology of the twentieth–century policeman has been made the
subject of a whole group of historical studies.  There was no
connection in those days between the policeman and either the
educational or medical services.  This association which appears so
inevitable to us today would have seemed insane to the organizers
of the first police forces in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries.  The policeman, for them, was to be an animated barrier
and signpost, capable of leaping into action at the sight of
assault, petty larceny or unseemly behaviour.  Beyond that very
little initiative was expected from him.  He took into custody
people who were "given in charge".  Above him were officers,
usually of a different class, and associated with the force was a
group of criminal enquiry experts, who were quite capable of
handling most of the offences against the law that prevailed in the
era before the extensive introduction of rapid transit, power
machinery and mass production.  This pattern of police force worked
fairly well up to the beginning of the twentieth century.  Except
in districts where sexual prostitution was rife it remained fairly
honest.  It maintained a fairly high level of liberty, security of
property and social order for a century.  Only when the control of
morals or political intervention was thrust upon it did it prove
unequal to the strain.</p><p>And then, as the greater community of the World State began to
struggle clumsily and painfully out of traditional forms, we see
police control again outpaced by its task.  It gives way.  "Why,"
the student asks, "was this police organization unable to keep pace
with the new stresses?  Why were the ruling people of that time so
incapable of fitting it to the new demands upon it?"  We have
already indicated the main lines of the answer.  Just when the need
for a fundamental refashioning of the police of the world was
becoming urgent, came also, first that exacerbation of international
hostilities, of "secret service" and espionage to render any broad
international handling of the problem impossible, and secondly that
desperately foolish sacrifice of life to the creditor which seems to
be the inevitable conclusion of any social system based on
acquisition.</p><p>The Profit–Capitalist System was absolutely incapable of
controlling the unemployment it had evoked and the belligerence it
stimulated.  It stagnated on its hoards.  It fought against
inflation and it fought against taxation.  It died frothing
economies at the mouth.  It killed the schools on which public
acquiescence rested.  Impartially it restricted employment and the
relief of the unemployed.  Even on this plain issue of its police
protection it economized.  Impossible, it said, to plan a new
police when we cannot even pay for the police we have.</p><p>And so the desperate fight of an essentially nineteenth–century
pattern of police organization, under–financed, inadequately
equipped, divided up, controlled by small–scale, antiquated
national or parochial authorities, in many cases rotten with
corruption, against the monstrous forces of disorganization
released by the irregular hypertrophies to social development was
added to the other conflicts of that distressful age.</p><p>In spite of a notable amount of corruption and actual descents
into criminality, the general will of most of the police forces
seems to have remained sound.  Most but not all.  Most of these
organizations did keep up a fight for order even when they were in
a process of dissolution.  They did keep up their traditional war
against crime.  But their methods underwent a considerable
degeneration, which was shared, and shared for the same reason, by
the criminal law of the period.  Police and prosecutor both felt
that the dice were loaded against them, that they were battling
against unfair odds.  Their war against crime became a feud.  It
grew less and less like a serene control, and more and more like
a gang conflict.  They were working in an atmosphere in which
witnesses were easily intimidated and local sympathy more
often than not against the law.  This led to an increasing
unscrupulousness on their part in the tendering and treatment of
evidence.  In many cases (see Aubrey Wilkinson's The Natural
History of the Police Frame–up, 1991) the police deliberately
manufactured evidence against criminals they had good reason to
believe guilty, and perjured themselves unhesitatingly.  Wilkinson
declares that in the early twentieth century hundreds of thousands
of wrongdoers were "justly condemned on false evidence", and that
they could have been condemned in no other way.</p><p>But the apologetics of Wilkinson for the police break down when he
comes to the next aspect of their degeneration under stress.  We
have all read with horror of the use of torture in mediæval
practice and shuddered at the fact that there were even special
machines and instruments in those days, the rack, the thumbscrew,
the boot and so forth, for the infliction of pain.  But there
remains little doubt now that the police of the twentieth century,
fighting with their backs to the wall against enormous odds, did go
very far towards a revival of torture against those they believed
to be social dangers.  It is a difficult as well as an ugly task to
disentangle this story now, but sufficient fact emerges to show us
that in the general decay of behaviour that was going on, not
merely casual blows and roughness of handling, but the systematic
exhaustion, pestering, ill–treatment and actual torment of persons
under arrest in order to extort confessions and incriminating
statements, became prevalent.</p><p>There is no real distinction in nature between the processes that
led up to this chaotic nucleation of human beings about gangs and
organizations for frankly criminal purposes and those which led to
protective associations for the illegal maintenance of security and
order and again to those much wider allegiances within the state
such as the nationalist Sokols in the Austrian provinces that
became Szecho Slovakia, the Irish Republican organizations, the Ku
Klux Klan in America, the multitudinous secret societies of India,
China, and Japan, the Communist Party which captured Russia, the
Fascist who captured Italy, the Nazis who captured Germany, all of
which pursued on bolder and bolder scales large intimidatory and
revolutionary economic and political ends.  All these were
structurally great gangster systems.  Instead of specific immediate
blackmail they sought larger satisfactions; that is all the
difference.  Even when the organisation as a whole had large
conceptions of its function, it was apt to degenerate locally into
a mere boss or bully rule.  All these forms of recrystallization
within the community, large and small, arose because of the
inadaptability and want of vigour and cooperation in the formal
governing, economically directive and educational systems.  Because
there was no foresight to ensure continuity in the growth of
institutions, there were these unpremeditated and often morbid
growths, expressive of the accumulating discomfort and discontent
and of the need for a more intimate, energetic and fruitful form of
human association.</p><p>It is paradoxical but true that the civilized human society of the
later nineteenth and earlier twentieth centuries broke up because
of the imperative need of human beings to live in active
combination.  It was pulled to pieces by its own new cohesions.
Until there was a complete, satisfactory and vigorous World–State
organization potentially in being, the continuation of this
breaking up and reassembling of social energy was inevitable.  It
was like the break–up of caterpillar organs in the cocoon to form
the new structures of the imago.</p><p>Even the Modern State Fellowship itself, so far as many of its
nuclei were concerned, was at first of this nature, a coalescence
of all these varied technicians who realized that employment would
vanish, that everything they valued in life would vanish, with the
spread of social disorder.  They constituted protective and
aggressive gangs with an unexampled power of world–wide
cooperation.  Their confluence became the new world.</p><p>The demoralization of the world's sea life, thanks to the surviving
vestiges of naval power, was far less rapid and complete than the
spread of disorder on the land.  It was only after the series of
naval mutinies towards the end of the last European war that the
ancient practice of piracy was resumed.  Even then ships could
still be policed and a recalcitrant ship brought to book much more
easily than the black streets of a town.  One or two pleasure
liners were boarded and held up in out–of–the–way ports in the
thirties, but in no case did the assailants get away with their
plunder.  In 1933 the Chinese fleet had disintegrated into shipfuls
of adventurers offering their services by wireless to the various
governments who divided the country.  But these stray warships did
little mischief before they were bought, captured or sunk by the
Japanese.</p><p>A Canadian pleasure liner, The King of the Atlantic, on one of the
last holiday voyages to be made, was seized on the high seas by an
armed gang in 1939, and an attempt was made to hold its passengers
to ransom.  They were all to be killed if the pursuit was pressed
home.  In the face, however, of a combined attack by American sea
and air forces, at that time still efficient though greatly in
arrears with their pay, the hearts of the gangsters failed them and
they surrendered ignominiously.</p><p>No ship of over 9,000 tons was ever captured by pirates.  This
relative maintenance of orderliness at sea was due to special
conditions—the then recent discovery of radio communications, for
example.  It outlasted the practical cessation of shipbuilding in
the forties and an immense shrinkage in the world's shipping.</p><p>Nor did new types of criminal appear in the air until after the
third European conflict, and then not overwhelmingly.  Here again
was a field of human activity, essentially simple and controllable.
For a time indeed the aeroplane was the safest as well as the
swiftest method of getting about the world.  For some years after
the practical cessation of general land travel the infrequent
aviator still hummed across the sky, over dangerous city and
deserted highroad, over ruined country houses and abandoned
cultivations, recalling the memory of former disciplines and the
promise of an orderly future.</p><p>There were fewer aeroplanes just as there were fewer ships, and,
because of the general discouragement of enterprise, there was
little change of type, yet the skies, like the high seas, remained
practically outside the range of the general social debacle until
well past the middle of the century.  The need for aerodromes, for
repairing and fuelling, held the dwindling body of aviators
together.  Air outrages at the worst phase were still scattered and
disconnected events.  And it was in the air at last and along the
air routes that the sword of a new order reappeared.</p></section><footer/></body></html>