<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>7: Intellectual Antagonism to the Modern State</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch03s06.xhtml" title="6: The Growth of Resistance to the Sea and Air Ways Control"/><link rel="next" href="ch03s08.xhtml" title="8: The Second Conference at Basra, 1978"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="7: Intellectual Antagonism to the Modern State" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646951620"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">7: Intellectual Antagonism to the Modern State</h2></div></div></div><p>The earliest known histories are dynastic.  They are little more
than lists of priest–kings and kings and tribes and contributions.
With Herodotus history became political.  It was only in the
eighteenth century (C.E.) that economic processes came into the
story, and only after the time of Karl Marx that their essential
importance was recognized.  Later still, climatic, biological and
geographical changes were woven into the historical tapestry.  Not
until the last hundred years have education, cultural influences
and psychological sequences generally been given their proper rôle
in the human drama.</p><p>The most difficult thing in our understanding of the past is to
realize, even in the most elementary form, the mental states of
those men and women, who seem so deceptively like ourselves.  They
had bodies on exactly the same pattern as ours, if not so well
exercised, well nourished and uniformly healthy; they had brains as
capable as ours and as complicated.  It is only when we compare
their conduct with ours that we realize that, judged by their
contents and their habits of reaction, those brains might almost
have belonged to another species of creature.</p><p>We read incredulously about the public burning of religious
heretics, of the torture of criminals to enforce confession, of
murders and outrages, of the offence of rape, of the hunting and
tormenting of animals for "sport", of men and women paying money
for the pleasure of throwing sticks at a tethered cock until it
died, and it is hard to resist the persuasion that our ancestors
were insane.  Most of us, were we suddenly put back into the London
of King Henry VIII, would be as frightened, and frightened in the
same way, as if we were put into a ward of unattended criminal
lunatics.  But the brains of these people were no more diseased
than ours.  Their mental habit systems had been built up on a
different framework; and that is the whole difference.</p><p>It was perfectly sane men who made the World War, who allowed the
private capitalist system to smash itself to fragments in spite of
reiterated warnings, and who came near to destroying mankind.  If
the reader were sent back only for the hundred and seventy years
between now and 1933, he would still feel a decided uneasiness
about what people might or might not do next.  Yet as he fought
down his alarm and went about among them he would have found them
as completely satisfied of the sanity of their own mental shapes as
he was.</p><p>Presently he would have found himself trying to adapt himself to
those mental shapes.  In the end he might come to realize that, in
his own case also, it might be that the things he felt compelled to
believe and do, and the things he found impossible to believe and
do, though they had served his everyday purposes in his own time
fairly well, were no more final in the scheme of things than the
ideology that framed the motives and acts of a Roman emperor or a
Sumerian slave.</p><p>The difficulty in the comparison and understanding of past mental
states with our own increases rather than diminishes as we approach
the present, because the differences become more subtle and more
interwoven with familiar phrases and with values we accept.  We
cannot keep in mind that meanings are perpetually being expanded or
whittled away.  We live to–day so saturated in our circumstances,
so full of the security, abundance and vitalizing activity of our
world–commonweal, that it is hard to realize how recently it was
possible for minds of the highest intelligence to call the most
fundamental conceptions of our present order in question.  Even in
the middle Twentieth Century, ideas that now seem so natural and
necessary to us that we cannot imagine them disputed, appeared
extravagant, impossible and offensive to brains that were in their
essential quality just as good as the best alive to–day.</p><p>In the early half of the Twentieth Century a great majority of
educated and intelligent men and women had no faith whatever in the
Modern State; they hated it, feared it and opposed it, and it is
doubtful whether the balance was redressed until the Twenty–first
Century was well under way.  The Modern State was built up, by
comparatively mediocre men, upon whom the necessary group of ideas
happened to strike with compelling force.  As H. Levy insisted in
his Universe of Science as early as 1932 (Historical Documents:
General Ideas Series, 192301), science is a "social venture" rather
than an accumulation of individual triumphs.  Both the scientific
idea and the idea of the human community were not individual but
social products.  And the Modern State prevailed because its logic
steadily conquered not this man in particular nor that man in
particular, but the sense of fitness in the general human
intelligence.</p><p>Maxwell Brown, in his monumental studies of the growth of the
Modern State idea, has made a fairly exhaustive review of the art
and literature of the early Twentieth Century.  Except in the
writings of a few such sociologists as J. A. Hodson, Harry Elmer
Barnes, James Harvey Robinson, C. A. and Mary Beard, Raymond B.
Fosdick and a few American and English journalists, and in such
alarmist fantasies as Aldous Huxley's Brave New World, there is no
sense whatever of the immense revolutionary changes that were
occurring in the social structure.  Bernard Shaw, for example,
though classed as a revolutionary writer, never, except in his
preposterous Back to Methuselah, anticipated.  The mass of his work
was a witty and destructive commentary upon contemporary things,
ending in that petition in bankruptcy, Too True to be Good.  He had
to a supreme degree the opposition mentality of the Irish.</p><p>This estrangement of literature from the Modern State movement
became more marked throughout the nineteen twenties and thirties.
As reality became urgent, as war and insolvency descended upon
social life, literature, art and criticism recoiled into studies
and studios and their own bitter and peculiar Bohemia; they became
elaborately stylistic and "rare", or brilliantly or brutally
smutty.</p><p>This decadence of literature, says Maxwell Brown, was an inevitable
expression of the economic decadence of the Thirties and Forties.
He draws an illuminating contrast between the type of mind
primarily directed towards æstheticism and the type of mind
primarily directed towards science.  The "æsthetic producer", he
insists, is dominated by acceptance; he writes for response.  The
scientific worker aims at knowledge and is quite indifferent
whether people like or dislike the knowledge he produces.  Æsthetic
life therefore is conditioned by the times; science conditions the
times.</p><p>Literature and art are necessarily time–servers, either abjectly so
or aggressively and pretentiously so.  They deflect real moods or
speculate upon possible moods in the community.  It is no good
writing books that people will not read or painting pictures from
which they merely turn away.  Psychology in those days had not
developed sufficiently to permit of a scientific analysis of
creative work, and such criticism as there was, when it was not a
simple release of spite, was essentially an effort either to
persuade or to browbeat people into buying books and pictures or
listening to music of a type fancied by the critic.  It was more
bitterly partisan and propagandist than political discussion.</p><p>In the expansive phase of the later nineteenth century the general
confidence of the prosperous classes was reflected in a large,
hopeful, forward–looking complacent literature, and every critic
was, so to speak, an uncle, a prosperous uncle, sitting by the
fire, but the sense of contraction and advancing dangers that
troubled the patrons of art and literature as the twentieth century
unfolded threw a defensive quality over the intellectual world,
outside the spheres of science and invention.  The progressive note
was popular no longer.  The reading offered to the people was
pervaded by a nagging hostility to new things, by lamentations for
imaginary lost loyalties and vanished virtues.</p><p>It was not so much that the writers of the time desired
civilization to retrace its steps, as that they wished that no more
steps should be taken.  They wanted things to stop—oh, they wanted
them to stop!  The underlying craving was for consolidation and
rest before more was lost.  There was little coherent system in the
objections taken; it was objection at large.  Mass production was
very generally reprehended; science rarely got a good word; war—
with modern weapons—was condemned, though much was to be said for
the "chivalrous" warfare of the past; there were proposals to
"abolish" aeroplanes and close all the laboratories in the world;
it was assumed that hygiene, and especially sexual hygiene, "robbed
life of romance"; the decay of good manners since the polished days
of Hogarth, Sir Charles Grandison and Tony Lumpkin was deplored,
and the practical disappearance of anything that could be called
Style.  As one nineteenth–century American writer lamented, in
suitably archaic English:</p><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>"How life hath cheapened, and how blank</td></tr><tr><td>The Worlde is! like a fen</td></tr><tr><td>Where long ago unstained sank</td></tr><tr><td>The starrie gentlemen:</td></tr><tr><td>Since Marston Moor and Newbury drank</td></tr><tr><td>King Charles his gentlemen."</td></tr></table><p>That was the dominant note.</p><p>Maxwell Brown gives a volume of material, quotations (Literature
Hangs Back; Historical Documents: General Ideas Series 311002) from
about four thousand representative books and papers.</p><p>As the world emerged again from the sheer desolation of the
Famished Fifties and the great pestilence, this purely opposition
mentality revived in hundreds of thousands of elderly literate
people whose brains had been fitted and turned round in that way
for good.  It revived because it was all there was to revive in
them; and it met with all too ready and natural an acceptance among
those endless myriads of cleverish active people who were now
trying to get private businesses and private profit systems going
before it became too late for ever, between the expanding system—
of the Transport Control and its collaterals above, and the
inarticulate and still needy masses below.  They did not realize
how much the revival of prosperity was due to the new organization.
It was not in their type of mind to want to account for revivals of
prosperity.  What they desired to do was to take advantage of the
"turn of luck".  To them from the first the Transport Control
appeared as a formidable competitor, harsh in spirit and still
harsher in method, which had set itself to prevent smaller brighter
folk making hay while the sun shone.  They were only too eager to
see it as a huge, cheap, nasty, vulgar menace to all the jolly
little profits and rewards and assurances that were peeping up
again in life.  For the loyalty and obedience of servants, it
offered them ingenious mechanical arrangements; for the labour of
respectful toilers, it suggested indifferent and dangerous power
machinery.  Are we not wise and virtuous enough in ourselves, they
asked, that this World Control should come "tidying us up"?</p><p>Manifestly the new order was resolved to "incorporate" (hateful
word!), if it could, all these would–be privileged, would–be
irresponsible people.  Its face was hard towards them.  Its
hygienic and educational activities threatened an increasing
regulation of their lives.  It proposed to rob them of the natural
excitements and adventure of gambling and speculation; to deprive
them of the legitimate advantages of their foresight and business
flair.  It threatened them with service; service and ever more
service—a rôle, they insisted, that would be unendurably
"monotonous".  They wanted to be good sometimes and bad sometimes
and jump from this to that.  A "soulless uniformity" became the
bugbear of these recalcitrant minds.</p><p>The workers often resented Modern State methods almost as much as
their immediate employers.  Men have always been difficult to
educate and reluctant to submit themselves to discipline, and there
was a curious suggestion of the schoolmaster about these fellows of
the Modern State nuclei.  Dislike of what was at hand helped to
conjure up fears of what might lie beyond.  Once freedom of
business had gone, what rules and regulations might not presently
enmesh the wilful individual under the thumb of this one world
employer?  For instance, the Modern State centres were talking of a
control of population; it was easy to see in that a hideous
invasion of the most private moments in life.  Weights and measures
and money to–day, and wives and parentage tomorrow!</p><p>These widely diffused repugnances, fears and antagonisms were
enhanced by the difficulties put in the way of aspirants to the
Modern State Fellowship and to positions of responsibility in the
service of the Controls.  Jobs were not for everyone.  Rejected
candidates to the Fellowship were among the most energetic of
Modern State antagonists.  By 1970, all over the world, wherever
the remains of the old prosperous and educated classes of
"independent" and business people were to be found, appeared
associations to combat the activities of the Modern State nuclei.
There were Liberty Clubs and Free Trade Associations; there were
Leagues of Citizens, Trade Protection Chambers and "Return to
Legality" societies.  There were organized religious and patriotic
revivals.  The Modern State schools were discovered to be immoral,
unpatriotic and anti–religious.  It was extraordinary how the
money–changers hurried to the deserted temples and clamoured for
the return of Christ.</p><p>Every town and city found someone or other—as often as not it was
some elderly lawyer or politician from the old days—keen to revive
and protect its privileges.  The world heard once more of the
rights of peoples and nations to be free and sovereign within their
borders.  A hundred different flags fluttered more abundantly every
day about the reviving earth in the sacred name of freedom.  Even
men who were engaged in organizing debt–serf cultivation and debt–
serf industrialism in the American cotton districts, in the old
rubber plantations and in the factories of India, China and South
Italy, appeared as generous supporters of and subscribers to the
sacred cause of individual liberty.</p><p>The behaviour of the inferior masses showed a wide divergence of
reactions.  The widespread communist propaganda of the War Years
and the Famished Fifties had intensified their natural hostility to
the profit–seeking bourgeoisie, and there was little chance of
their making common cause with them; but the Modern State Society,
with the lessons of Russia before it, had no disposition to
exacerbate the class war for its own ends.  It knew quite clearly
that to appeal to the mere insurrectionary impulse of the
downtrodden was to invite the specialist demagogue, sustained by
his gang and his heelers, his spies and secret police, to take the
chair in the council chamber.</p><p>De Windt had driven that point well home.  "Creative revolution
cannot cooperate with insurrectionary revolution."  There was to be
no flattery of ignorance and inferiority as though they were the
keys to an instinctive wisdom; no incitement to envy and jealousy
against knowledge and ability.  The Modern State meant to abolish
toil, and that meant to abolish any toiling class, proletariat,
labour mass, serf or slave, whatever it was called, but it had no
intention of flattering and using the oafish mental as well as
physical limitations it meant to liberate from existence
altogether.  It took the risk that the forces of reaction would
organize strikes and mass resistance against its regulations, its
economies of employment, its mechanization, its movements of
population and the like, among the other inevitable difficulties of
its task.</p><p>So the world–stage was set for the triangular drama of the late
Twentieth and early Twenty–first Centuries, in which reaction in a
thousand forms, and Modern State organization in one, struggled
against each other to subjugate or assimilate the more or less
passive majority of mankind.</p><p>We write in outline, and necessarily in an elementary history it is
only the primary lines that can be given.  But just as when we
enlarge our scale of observation, the broad divisions of a map
vanish and countries and divisions become hills, valleys,
buildings, forests, roads, and at last, when we come to earth,
stones, pebbles, blades of grass and flowers, so this rough
division of humanity into three intermingled and intensely
interacting multitudes was in reality qualified by a thousand
million individual complications.</p><p>On the whole the content of people's minds was far more intricate
then than it is now.  That is a principle the student of history
must never forget.  The intellectual progress of mankind had been a
continual disentanglement and simplification leading to increased
grasp and power.  These closing decades of the Age of Frustration
were still, in comparison with our own time, a time of uncertainties,
inaccuracies, mixed motives, irrational surprises and bitter late
realizations.  There was scarcely an unskilled toiler in the world
who was really no more than a passive clod in the hands of his
exploiters and employers.  There was scarcely a reactionary who did
not in some fashion want tidiness and efficiency.  And, conversely,
there was hardly a Fellow of the Modern State organization, man or
woman, who had not spasms of acute self–seeking and vanity, who
could not be doctrinaire, intolerant and vindictive on occasion, who
could not be touched by the sentimental and æsthetic values of the
old order, and who did not like, love and react to scores of people
incurably shaped to the opposition pattern.</p><p>The New Fiction of the Eighties and Nineties is enormously
preoccupied with this universal battle of ideas and mental habits
in people's minds.  The simpler novels of the earlier past and the
novels of the present day tell of individual character in a set
battle between good and bad in a world of undisputed standards; but
the novels of those years of social conflict tell of a wild
confusion between two sorts of good and two sorts of bad and of
innate character distorted in a thousand ways.  It was a difficult
age.  Life still has its endless ironies and ambiguities, but they
are as nothing to those amidst which the men of 1970 had to steer
their courses.</p></section><footer/></body></html>