<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>1: The Plan of the Modern State is Worked Out</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch03.xhtml" title="Book the Third"/><link rel="next" href="ch03s02.xhtml" title="2: Thought and Action: The New Model of Revolution"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="1: The Plan of the Modern State is Worked Out" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646872100"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">1: The Plan of the Modern State is Worked Out</h2></div></div></div><p>In the preceding chapters the culmination, the dislocation and the
collapse of the private capitalist civilization has been told.  It
has been a chronicle of disaster, wherein particular miseries, the
torment and frustration of thousands of millions, are more than
overshadowed by its appalling general aimlessness.  We have seen
the urge towards unity and order, appearing and being frustrated,
reappearing and again being defeated.  At last it reappeared—and
won.  The problem had been solved.</p><p>The world was not able to unify before 1950 for a very simple
reason: there was no comprehensive plan upon which it could unify;
it was able to unify within another half century because by that
time the entire problem had been stated, the conditions of its
solution were known and a social class directly interested in the
matter had differentiated out to achieve it.  From a vague
aspiration the Modern World–State became a definite and so a
realizable plan.</p><p>It was no great moral impulse turned mankind from its drift towards
chaos.  It was an intellectual recovery.  Essentially what happened
was this: social and political science overtook the march of
catastrophe.</p><p>Obscure but persistent workers in these decades of disaster pieced
together the puzzle bit by bit.  There is a fantastic disproportion
between the scale of the labourers and the immense consequences
they released.  The psychology of association, group psychology,
was a side of social biology that had been disregarded almost
entirely before the time of which we are writing.  People had still
only the vaguest ideas about the origins and working processes of
the social structure in and by which they lived.  They accepted the
most arbitrary and simple explanations of their accumulated net of
relationships, and were oblivious even to fundamental changes in
that net.  Wild hopes, delusions and catastrophes ensued
inevitably.</p><p>If you had interrogated an ordinary European of the year 1925 about
the motives for his political activities and associations and his
general social behaviour, he would probably have betrayed a feeling
that your enquiry was slightly indelicate, and if you overcame that
objection, he would have talked either some nonsense about the
family as the nucleus of social organization, a sort of expansion
of brothers and cousins, kith and kin to the monarch, the Sire of
the whole system, or he would have gone off in an entirely
different direction and treated you to a crude version of
Rousseau's Social Contract in which he and the other fellows had
combined under agreed–upon rules for mutual defence and aid.  The
betting would have been quite even as to which of these flatly
contradictory explanations he would have given.</p><p>He would have said nothing about religious ties in 1925, though
fifty years earlier he might have based his whole description on
the Divine Will.  He would have betrayed no lucid apprehension of
the part played by the money nexus in gearing relationships; he
would have been as unconscious as his Roman predecessor of the
primary social importance of properly adjusted money.  He would
have thought it was just stuff you earnt and handed out and got
things for, and he might have added rather irrelevantly that it was
"the root of all evil".  He would certainly have referred to the
family idea when his patriotism was touched upon, if not before, to
justify that tangle of hates, fears and consequent and subordinate
loyalties; he would have talked of "mother country" or "fatherland".
If he practised any craft or skill, he might or might not have had
his mind organized in relation to his profession or trade union, but
there would be no measure between that and his patriotism, either
might override the other, and either might give way before some
superstitious or sexual complex in his make–up.</p><p>Incidentally he would have revealed extensive envy systems and
social suspicion and distrust systems, growing up at every weak
point like casual fungi.  Everything would be flavoured more or
less with the chronic hatred endemic everywhere.  And all these
disconnected associations from which flowed his judgments and
impulses he would have regarded as natural—as natural as the shape
of his ears; he would have been blankly unconscious that the
education of school and circumstances had had anything to do with
his accumulation.</p><p>On millions of minds equipped in this fragmentary fashion,
uninformed or misinformed and with no internal connectedness, the
institutions of the world were floating right up to the middle of
the Twentieth Century.  Tossing at last, rather than merely
floating.  Men called themselves individualist or socialist, and
they had not the beginnings of an idea how the individual was and
might be related to society; they were nationalist and patriotic,
and none of them could tell what a nation was.  It was only when
these institutions began to batter against each other, and leak and
heel over, and show every disposition to go down altogether, that
even intelligent men began to realize how haphazard, sentimental
and insincere were their answers to the all–important question:
"What holds us together and sustains our cooperations?"</p><p>This prevalent superficiality and ignorance about socializing
forces was the necessary reflection of a backwardness and want of
vigour in academic circles and the intellectual world.  The common
man, busied about his petty concerns, did not know nor think about
collective affairs because at the time there existed no knowledge
or ordered thought in an assimilable form to reach down and
stimulate his mind.  The social body was mentally embryonic from
the top downward.  That it was possible to demonstrate a complete
system of social reactions and to state the necessary idea of the
Modern State in convincing and practically applicable terms, had
still to penetrate to the minds not merely of the politicians and
statesmen, but of the psychologists, historians and so–called
"economists" of the time.</p><p>In 1932 Group Psychology was at about the same level of development
as was physical science in the days of the Marquess of Worcester's
Century of Inventions (1663).  It was still in that vague
inconclusive phase of "throwing out" ideas.  It was no more capable
of producing world order than the physical science of 1663 could
have produced an aeroplane or a steam turbine.  The ordinary man
seeking guidance in the dismay of the Great Slump (see Emil
Desaguliers' Ideas in Chaos and Society in Collapse, 2017) was
confronted with a sort of intellectual rummage sale.  He had
believed that somewhere somebody knew; he discovered that nobody
had ever yet bothered to know.  A dozen eminent authorities with
the utmost mutual civility were giving him every possible and
impossible counsel in his difficulties, suavely but flatly
contradicting each other.  They were able to do so because they
were all floating on independent arbitrary first assumptions
without any structural reference to the primary facts of human
ecology.</p><p>Nevertheless certain primary matters were being rapidly analysed at
that time.  The general understanding of money, for example, was
increasing rapidly.  Desaguliers notes about a hundred and eighty
names, including the too–little–honoured name of that choleric but
interesting amateur, Major C. H. Douglas (Works in the Historical
Documents, Economic Section B. 178200), who were engaged in
clearing away the conception of a metallic standard as a monetary
basis.  They were making it plain that the only possible money for
a progressive world must keep pace with the continually increasing
real wealth of that world.  They were getting this into the general
consciousness as a matter of primary importance.</p><p>But they were proposing the most diverse methods of realizing this
conception.  The "Douglas Plan" appealed to the general social
credit, but was limited by the narrow political outlook of the
worthy Major, who could imagine bankers abolished but not
boundaries.  In America an interesting movement known as
"Technocracy" was attracting attention.  Essentially that was a
soundly scientific effort to restate economics on a purely physical
basis.  But it was exploited in a journalistic fashion and
presented to a remarkably receptive public as a cut–and–dried
scheme for a new social order in which social and economic life was
to be treated as an energy system controlled by "experts".  The
explicit repudiation of democratic control by the Technologists at
that date is very notable.  The unit of energy was to be the basis
of a new currency.  So every power station became a mint and every
waterfall a potential "gold–mine", and the money and the energy in
human affairs remained practically in step.  Another important
school, represented by such economists as Irving Fisher and J. M.
Keynes, was winning an increased adherence to the idea of a price
index controlling the issue of currency.</p><p>It was a phase of disconnected mental fermentation.  Many of those
who were most lucid about monetary processes were, like Douglas and
Keynes, still in blinkers about national and imperial boundaries;
they wanted to shut off some existing political system by all sorts
of artificial barriers and restraints from the world at large, in
order to develop their peculiar system within its confines.  They
disregarded the increasing flimsiness of the traditional political
structure altogether.  They were in too much of a hurry with their
particular panacea to trouble about that.  And if the money
reformers were not as a rule cosmopolitans, the cosmopolitans were
equally impatient with the money reformers and blind to the primary
importance of money.</p><p>A third class of intelligences stressed the urgent necessity for
great public enterprises to correct the paradoxical increase of
unemployment consequent upon the increase of productivity that had
taken the shiftless world by surprise.  That was an independent
maladjustment.  But thinkers of this school were apt to disregard
the importance of monetary rectification.  As to who was to control
the more complicated methods of mutual service proposed, the world
money and the world socialism and so forth, there was an even
greater diversity of outlook and an even greater conflict of mental
limitations.  As Desaguliers says in his summary:  "People could
not get out of the sinking social vessels in which they found
themselves for the simple reason that nothing but the imperfectly
assembled phantom of a salvage ship was yet in sight, a large
rudderless, powerless promise, so to speak, standing by."</p><p>Only very knowledgeable people could have foretold then how nearly
this phase of throwing out bright but disconnected ideas was
drawing to its end, and how rapidly the consolidation of social and
educational science into an applicable form was to go forward, once
that it had begun.  The rush of correlated social discoveries and
inventions to the rescue of mankind, when at last it was fairly
started, was even more rapid and remarkable than the release of
steam and electrical energy in the nineteenth century.</p><p>It went on under difficulties.  Perhaps it was quickened and
purified by those very difficulties.</p><p>Gustave De Windt's great work, Social Nucleation (1942), was the
first exhaustive study of the psychological laws underlying team
play and esprit de corps, disciplines of criminal gangs, spirit of
factory groups, crews, regiments, political parties, churches,
professionalisms, aristocracies, patriotisms, class consciousness,
organized research and constructive cooperation generally.  It
did for the first time correlate effectively the increasing
understanding of individual psychology, with new educational
methods and new concepts of political life.  In spite of its
unattractive title and a certain wearisomeness in the exposition,
his book became a definite backbone for the constructive effort of
the new time.</p><p>De Windt worked under all the handicap of the intellectual worker
in that uncomfortable time.  Much of his writing, like that of Marx
and Lenin, was done in the British Museum in London, but he was
expelled from England during a phase of xenophobia in 1939, and he
was not allowed to return from Holland to his "beloved Bloomsbury"
until 1941.  He was slightly gassed during the ninth Polish air
raid on Berlin, and this no doubt accelerated his death in
Bloomsbury, the tuberculous London slum in which his book was
completed.</p><p>Much has been done since to elaborate and correct the broad
generalizations he established.  But his name stands with those of
Plato, Galileo, Newton, Darwin and Robert Owen as marking a real
step forward in the expression and expansion of human ideas.  Such
men are all in their various dimensions something more than
themselves, like stones that have become surveyors' datum marks.
After 1950 De Windt's doctrines and formulæ spread with great
rapidity, in spite of the disturbed state of the world—assisted
and enforced indeed by the disturbed state of the world.</p><p>Few people read De Windt nowadays, just as few people read Plato or
Bacon or Charles Darwin or Adam Smith or Karl Marx, but what he
thought has been built into the general outlook of mankind.  What
he established is now platitude, but in his time very much of what
he had to say would still have seemed heresy and fantasy, if it had
not been for the patient massiveness, the Darwinesque patience,
with which he built up his points.</p><p>The most important features of his teaching were, first, that he
insisted with an irrefutable rigidity upon the entirely artificial
nature of the content of the social side of a human being.  Men are
born but citizens are made.  A child takes to itself what is
brought to it.  It accepts example, usage, tradition and general
ideas.  All the forms of its social reactions and most of its
emotional interpretations are provided by its education.</p><p>"Obviously," the reader will say.  But it is essential to the
understanding of history to realize that before De Windt's time
this was not obvious.  Moral values, bias and prejudice, hatreds
and so forth were supposed to come "by nature."  And consequently
the generation about him had grown up in a clotted mass of outworn
explanations, metaphors, mythologies and misleading incentives, and
the misshapen minds reflected and condoned the misshapen social
order.  His rôle in intellectual history is primarily that of a
strong arm sweeping a terrible litter of encumbrance aside, and
replacing it by a clearly defined structure.  He restored again to
credibility what Plato had first asserted: that, however difficult,
it was possible to begin again at the beginning with uninfected
minds.  And having cleared his ground in this way he proceeded to
build up the imperatives of that sane progressive education and
life for mankind which now opens out about us.</p><p>He brought home clearly to the general intelligence firstly that
the monetary method of relationship was essential to any complex
productive society, since it was the only device that could give
personal choice and freedom in return for service.  It liberated
economic relationships.  But money was not a thing in itself, it
was a means to an end, and its treatment was to be judged entirely
by its attainment of that end.  It had indeed grown out of a
barterable commodity, a thing in itself, silver or gold or the
like, but it had ceased to be this, and it was the difficulties in
the transition of money from the former to the latter status that
had released those diseases of the economic system which had in
succession first destroyed the Roman imperialism and then the
European sovereign states.  A completely abstract money, a money as
abstract and free from association with any material substance as
weight or measure, had to be contrived for mankind.  Human society
could not be saved from chaos without it.  It had to be of
worldwide validity; its tokens and notes had to be issued to
maintain a practically invariable price index, and it had to be
protected by the most stringent laws against any form of profit–
making manipulation.  He demonstrated that not merely forgery, but
every form of gambling and speculation, had to be made major
offences under a criminal code.  He showed that usury was
unnecessary.  He unravelled the old entanglements by which new
production had hitherto been saddled with permanent debts for its
promotion and experiments.  He made profit–making banking, that Old
Man of the Sea, get off the back of enterprise.  He eliminated
every excuse for its profits.  Banking was a public function.  The
distribution of credit was a vital part of government.</p><p>The New Banking of the Twenty–first Century grew up along the lines
he established for it.  To–day it is our system of public book–
keeping, a part of our state statistical organization, a clearing–
house of obligations and a monetary record of the accumulating
surplus of racial energy, which the world–controls apportion to our
ever expanding enterprises.  It is entirely public and entirely
gratuitous.  It is hard to realize that it was ever allowed to be a
source of private and secret profit.  We register a man's earnings
and spending as we register births and deaths.  Our money is
fundamentally a check on these publicly kept private accounts.</p><p>But this desiratum of a sufficiency of invariable money was only a
"foundation need," a quantitative basis for the establishment of
vital relationships, or, in De Windt's terminology, for "social
nucleation."  So soon as money was put in order it ceased to be
necessary to trouble about money, just as it is needless to think
about light and air in a properly lit and ventilated room.</p><p>For a couple of centuries before De Windt, the family, which had
been the common social cellule throughout the whole agricultural
age of mankind, had been losing its distinctness, had been
dissolving into larger systems of relationship, more especially in
the Northern and Western communities.  It had been losing its
economic, its mental, and its emotional autonomy at the same time.
In the nineteenth century this dissolution of the family had gone
on very rapidly indeed.  The domestication of women, and their
concentration upon children and the home, had diminished greatly.</p><p>By general sentiment, the instinctive factor in family unification
had always been overrated.  In effect, that instinctive bond
dissolves long before the children are thirteen or fourteen.  After
that age the binding force of parent to child and vice versa is not
instinct, but affection, convenience, habit, and tradition.  And
that convenience, usage, and tradition had dwindled.  Put to the
test of exterior attractions, family solidarity had weakened not
only in the West, but also, as Asia had been Westernized, in
Turkey, India, China, and Japan.  This was so essentially, even
more than apparently.  The family home remained generally as a
meeting–place and common domicile for parents and children, but it
ceased to be a vehicle of tradition, it ceased to train and
discipline.  It ceased to do so for the simple reason that these
functions were now discharged with far more emphasis, if with less
intensity, by exterior agencies.  Citizens were begotten in the
home but they were no longer MADE in the home.</p><p>De Windt drew a vivid contrast between the home life of a Central
European family in the late eighteenth century, with the father
reading the Bible to his assembled offspring, conducting daily
prayer, watching over, reproving and chastizing his sons and
daughters up to the age of sixteen or seventeen and even
controlling their marriage, and the loosely associated family
structure in the early twentieth century.</p><p>This structural dissolution was universally recognized long before
the time of De Windt, but it was left for him to emphasize the need
for a planned "renucleation" in the social magma that arose out of
this dissolution.  The popular school, the experiences and
associations of industrialized production, the daily paper and so
forth, had knocked the strength out of the mental and moral
education of the home and put nothing in its place.  The sapping
forces had not, in their turn, been converted into "organic
forces."  In default of these, minds were lapsing towards crude and
base self–seeking and entirely individualistic aims.</p><p>These contemporary emotional suggestions and haphazard ideologies
were not good enough, he preached, to make a human being a
tolerable social unit.  Social tissue was not to be made and
coordinated on such lines.  The stars in their courses were
pointing our race towards the organized world community, the Modern
State, and if ever that goal was to be attained, if the
reorganization of the species was not to collapse, degenerate, and
perish by the wayside, then the individual mind throughout the
world had to be educated, had to be disciplined and equipped,
definitely and sufficiently to this end.  That would not come by
nature.  The social side of the individual had to be oriented
deliberately.  "Society is an educational product."</p><p>For the race to get to this Modern State as a whole it had to get
there as so many hundreds of millions of human beings, all
individually aware of that as the general objective at which their
lives aimed.  The Modern State could not arrive as an empty form
with all humanity left behind it.  Every teacher, every writer,
every talker, every two friends who talked together constituted a
potential primary nucleus in a renascent social system.  These
nuclei had to be organized.  Their existence had to be realized,
and they had to be brought into effective cooperation.  It is hard
nowadays to realize that once upon a time such commonplaces as
these were not commonplaces, and that in the very days when De
Windt was writing, multitudes of well–meaning people were
attempting to assemble "movements" for social reconstruction and
world revolution out of the raw, unprepared miscellany of the
contemporary crowd.  It was with extreme reluctance that impatient
reformers turned their minds from impossible coups d'état and
pronunciamentos, strikes against war and booby millennia, to this
necessary systematic preliminary renucleation of the world.  The
immediate task seemed too narrow and intense for them and its
objective too high and remote.  "It is no good asking people what
they want," wrote De Windt.  "That is the error of democracy.  You
have first to think out what they ought to want if society is to be
saved.  Then you have to tell them what they want and see that they
get it."</p><p>And further, he urged, if you cannot start nucleation everywhere,
then at least you can start it close at hand.  "Get the nuclei
going.  Be yourself a nucleus."  From the beginning of life, nuclei
have begotten nuclei.  The Modern State, which had to be evoked
everywhere, could be begun anywhere.</p><p>Another point that was new in his time, so far as Western
civilization went, was his insistence upon the greater importance
of adolescent education and his denial of the primary right of the
parent to shape his offspring according to his fancy.  The
"renucleation" of society had to be complete.  The "nuclei" which
were ultimately to become the sole educational and disciplinary
units of a new–born society would be in the first place, and
usually, intensive study circles and associations for moral and
physical training.  Their social and political activities were to
be secondary exercises, subordinated to a primary mental, moral and
bodily training.  He searched the social disorder about him for
favourable conditions for the pioneer nucleations.  He looked to
factories, laboratories, technical schools, public services,
hospital staffs, to banded men and women of all sorts, for the
material for his nucleation.  He insisted that the impulse to build
up a social order was instinctive.  Wherever there was social
confusion the crude efforts to get together into a new directive
order appeared.</p><p>He pointed to the Sokols, Nazis, Fascists, Communist Party members,
Kuomintang members of his time, as the first primitive intimations
of the greater organization that was coming.  They had the spirit
of an élite class, although they wasted it more or less upon the
loyalties and prejudices of the past.  People are not leading these
young men, he argued; "they are taking advantage of the instinctive
needs of these young men.  Try to realize what it is that they are—
however blindly—seeking."</p><p>Like St. Paul, the founder of Christianity, speaking to the
Athenians—he quotes the passage—he said:  "That Unknown God, whom
ignorantly ye worship, him declare I unto you."  He was declaring
the as yet unknown Modern State.</p><p>Intensively De Windt's teaching was a theory of education;
extensively it was the assertion of the Modern State.  These were
inseparable aspects of the same thing.  "A community is an
education in action," he declared.  And with a complete continuity
he carried up his scheme of social structure through every variety
of productive organization, control and enterprise.  Men were to
"fall in and serve this end."</p><p>Borrowing a word from Ortega y Gasset, but going boldly beyond that
original thinker, he declared that "plenitude" of life was now only
to be attained by living in relation to the Modern State.  All
other living was "waste, discontent and sorrow."  It was becoming
impossible to retain self–respect, to be happy within oneself,
unless one was "all in" upon that one sound objective.  The old
loyalties, to flag, to nation, to class, were outworn and
discredited.  They had become unreal.  They did not call out all
that was in a man, because now we saw their limitations.  They
could no longer keep up the "happy turgidity" of life.  They could
not be served "with a sure and untroubled soul".  They would
certainly leave a man in the end "deflated, collapsed into an
aimless self".  In the past men could live and live fully within
their patriotisms and their business enterprises, because they knew
no better.  But now they knew better.</p><p>Finally De Windt set himself diametrically against one of the
direst concepts of Parliamentary Democracy, a concept that still
had enormous influence in his time, and that was the idea of the
"Opposition."  "Criticize," he wrote, "yes, but do not obstruct."
If a directive organization is fundamentally bad, he taught, break
it and throw it away, but rid your minds altogether of a conception
of see–saw and give and take as a proper method in human affairs.
The Parliamentary gang Governments, that were then in their last
stage of ineptitude, were rotten with the perpetual amendment and
weakening of measures, with an endless blocking and barring of
projects, with enfeebling bargains and blackmailing concessions.
Against every directive body, every party in power, sat another
devoting itself to misrepresenting, thwarting, delaying, and
spoiling, often for no reason or for the flimsiest reasons, merely
for the sake of misrepresenting, thwarting, delaying and spoiling
what the governing body was attempting to do, in the hope of
degrading affairs to such a pitch of futility as to provoke a
change of government that would bring the opposition into power.
The opportunities of profit and advancement afforded in such a
mental atmosphere to a disingenuous careerist were endless.</p><p>All this tangle of ideas had to be swept aside.  "About most
affairs there can be no two respectable and antagonistic opinions,"
said De Windt.  "It is nonsense to pretend there can be.  There is
one sole right way and there are endless wrong ways of doing
things.  A government is trying to go the right way or it is
criminal.  Sabotage must cease.  It has always been one of the
ugliest vices of advanced movements.  It is a fundamental social
vice."</p><p>His discussion of the difference between Criticism and Opposition
is one of those classics that few people read.  It is a pity,
because it is a very good specimen of twentieth–century English
prose.  The right to criticize and the duty of well–wrought
criticism are fundamental to modern citizenship.  He considered how
that right and duty had been ignored by the shallow mentality of
Italian Fascism and how fatally they had been entangled with the
suppression of malignancy in Russia.  He analysed the reckless
irresponsibility of censorship in the Western communities.  There
was no law anywhere to restrain conspiracies, on the part of
religious, political, or business bodies, for the suppression of
publications.  His warnings against the suppression of opinion were
not so immediately effective as his general revolutionary project.
Many people did not realize what he was driving at.  In practice
the conflict of world order with the opposition spirit, during the
struggle to maintain the Air Dictatorship, was to lapse again and
again into the suppression of honest criticism.  In practice it was
found that criticism and suggestion passed by insensible degrees
into incitement and insurrectionary propaganda.</p><p>This clear–cut revolutionary scheme of De Windt's was vividly new
and tonic to the energetic young men of the middle twentieth
century.  We summarize here its main constructive conceptions in
spite of its present platitudinousness.  It is unnecessary to tell
in any detail his far–sighted schemes to link his nuclei into a
world propaganda, because by insensible degrees that organization
has grown into the educational system of our world to–day.  This
history and indeed every text book in use in the world could
well be dedicated to him.  And his complex and very detailed
anticipations of the process of a world revolution need not detain
us here (his Book V, The New World in the Body of the Old contains
most of this), because we can now tell of that vast reconstruction
itself.</p><p>In some respects he was remarkably prescient, in others he
estimated human reactions inaccurately and even incorrectly.  The
reconstruction of human affairs involved some very rough work from
which he would have recoiled.  None the less he put all the main
structural factors in the establishment of the Modern State so
plainly and convincingly before his fellow–men that soon thousands
and presently millions were living for that vision, were bringing
it out of thought into reality.  He made it seem so like destiny,
that it became destiny.</p><p>For some years his views spread very slowly.  An increasing number
of people knew about them, but at first very few made serious
efforts to realize them.  One man after another would say, "But
this is right!" and then "But this is impossible!"  De Windt was
dead before his school of thought became a power in the world.
Like Karl Marx, he was never to know of the harvest he had sown.</p><p>In our description of the failure of the League of Nations we have
noted how foredoomed that experiment was, because nowhere among
either the influential men of the time nor among the masses was
there any sense of the necessity and the necessary form of a new
world order.  The statesmen, diplomatists and politicians of the
time impress us as almost incredibly blind to things that are as
plain as daylight to us now, and it is hard for us to believe that
that blindness was not wilful.  It was not.  They could not see it.
We read their speeches at conference after conference until their
voices die away at last in the rising tide of disaster and we
almost cry out as we read:  "You idiots!  Wasn't world control
there just under your noses?  And was anything else but disaster
possible?"</p><p>The answer is that it was not precisely under their noses.  Slowly,
laboriously, with perpetual repetitions and slight variations, the
Obvious had to be got into and spread and diffused in the human
mind.  It is De Windt's peculiar claim to human gratitude, not that
he discovered anything fresh, but that he so built up and fortified
the Obvious, that not the most subtle and disingenuous mind, nor
the biggest fool who ever sentimentalized and spouted, could escape
honestly from its inexorable imperatives.</p></section><footer/></body></html>