<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>6: The Growth of Resistance to the Sea and Air Ways Control</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch03s05.xhtml" title="5: The First Conference at Basra: 1965"/><link rel="next" href="ch03s07.xhtml" title="7: Intellectual Antagonism to the Modern State"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="6: The Growth of Resistance to the Sea and Air Ways Control" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646934640"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">6: The Growth of Resistance to the Sea and Air Ways Control</h2></div></div></div><p>For nearly ten years the Air and Sea Control was able to grow and
extend its methods and influence without any general conflict.  The
little breeze between the Russian political control and the
technicians did not rise to a storm; instead it died away.  Russia
was learning wisdom at last and weakening in her resolve to
subordinate the modern scientific type of man to his old–
fashioned demagogic rival.  She had suffered so severely by the
miscalculations and convulsive direction of her party chiefs; she
was still so ill equipped mechanically, and so poorly provided with
aviators, that the old and now mentally weary dictatorship recoiled
from a new struggle with these and their associated technical
experts.  It is to be noted that, in spite of the closest
espionage, the creed of the Russian aviators, engineers, and men of
science was already the Modern State and not the Dictatorship of
the Proletariat, and that her political rulers were beginning to
understand this.</p><p>So that the Air and Sea Control, sustained by a multitude of nuclei
on De Windt's pattern scattered throughout the world, very much as
the Bolshevik political organization had been sustained by the
Communist Party, came into existence and spread its ever–growing
network about the planet without an immediate struggle.  Its
revolutionary nature was understood by few people other than its
promoters.  It grew rapidly.  As the Esthonian proverb says:  "One
must be born before one's troubles begin."</p><p>The recovery of human prosperity in that decade between 1965 and
1975 was very rapid.  It went on side by side with the expansion of
the Transport system.  By 1970 the Transport Control, the chief of
the subsidiaries of the general Air and Sea Control, was running
world–wide services that had as many as 25,000 aeroplanes aloft at
the same time; it had possessed itself of shipyards on the Tyne, in
Belfast, Hamburg, and a number of other points, and was building
steel cargo ships by the score; it was creating a new system of
high roads for which a number of the old main railway tracks were
taken over, and it was running water–power stations, substituting
our present chemical treatment of carboniferous strata for the
terrible hand coal–mining of the older economy, and it was working
oil.  It had developed a subsidiary body, the Supply Control, which
was rapidly becoming a vaster organization than its parent.  This
was engaged in producing iron and steel, producing or purchasing
rubber, metals, cotton, wool and vegetable substances, and
restoring the mass production of clothing of all sorts, electrical
material, mechanisms, and a vast variety of chemicals of which the
output had been dormant in some instances for twenty years or more.</p><p>Never very clearly cut off from the Supply Control was the Food
Control, which began ostensibly with the victualling of the
Transport Services, and was soon carrying on a vast barter in food
materials, its own surplus supplies and commodities generally
throughout the world.  In all its ramifications these three bodies
were in 1970 employing about two million people, to whom wages were
paid in the new modern dollars, energy dollars, good for units in
Transport, housing, and for all the priced commodities handled by
the Controls.</p><p>The property of all these Controls was vested in the Modern State
Society, which consisted at this time of about a quarter of a
million Fellows, who had to be qualified up to a certain level of
technical efficiency, who submitted to the Society disciplines
during their years of active participation, and received wages
varying by about 200 per cent above or below a mean standard,
according to their standing.  About a quarter of the other
employees were student apprentices aspiring to fellowship, and of
these the proportion was increasing.  The Society had already
developed the organization it was to retain for a century.  The
Fellows were divided into faculties for technical purposes; they
voted by localized groups upon local issues and they had a general
vote for the faculty delegations to the central council of the
Society, which had its first seat at Basra contiguous to the
central offices of the Three Controls.  The relation of the Society
to the Controls was not unlike the relation of the Communist Party
to the Moscow Government in the early days of the Soviet system; it
was a collateral activity of much the same people.</p><p>It was the Society itself which at first directed the educational
activities of the Modern State Movement.  Wherever it had either
its own "nuclei" or found employees of the Controls, it provided an
elementary education of the new pattern, which involved a very
clear understanding of the history and aims of the Modern State
idea, and wherever it had works and factories and a sufficient
supply of students, it founded and equipped science schools and
technical schools, which included psychology, medicine, group
psychology and administration.  Gradually a special section of
Training and Education was developed under the Air and Sea Control,
and this grew into a separate Educational Control.  But it never
became as distinct from, and collateral to, the Modern State
Fellowship as the rest of the Control organizations.  One may
figure the whole of this world system as a vast business octopus,
with the Air and Sea Control as its head and the other Controls as
its tentacles.  The account–keeping of this octopus centred at
Basra, but a rapid development of subsidiary record and statistical
bureaus also occurred.  Side by side grew the intelligence and
research services.  By 1970, the world meteorological service was
far in advance of anything that had ever existed before.</p><p>But already this restoration of communications and circulation was
producing effects far beyond the Fellowship and the power of
employment of the associated Controls.  The ebb in the vitality of
human life had already passed its maximum and now began a
restoration of activity everywhere, a fresh movement in the
decaying towns, a new liveliness upon the countryside, a general
reawakening of initiative, that were to confront the direction of
this fast growing nexus of the Modern State, with challenges,
difficulties, and menaces, that grew rapidly to tremendous
proportions.</p><p>It had been comparatively easy to spread throughout a prostrate and
bankrupt world the new system of air and sea communications and
trading that had been evolved.  That world was too exhausted by
war, famine, and pestilence and too impoverished to support
extensive and aggressive political organizations.  It was
altogether another problem, even with the spreading "nuclei", the
new schools and propaganda, to control and assimilate the
populations that now, no longer living in want and insecurity, were
beginning to feel a fresh strength and a renewed vigour of desire.</p><p>Let us review the world situation about 1975.  The Transport
Control had usurped a monopoly of air and sea transport and was
also monopolizing the use of its own new great roads.  This gave it
a practical ownership of the trade in staple products throughout
the world.  It was turning all the surplus products of its
activities back, when its salaries had been paid, into strengthening
its grip upon the general economy of mankind.  By 1975 the Modern
State Society counted just over a million Fellows, and in addition
it was employing and training two million candidates, it was simply
employing another three million and it had between seven and eight
million youngsters in its new schools.  They were all, we may note,
not only given a sound training in physical science and biology, but
were learning world history and so acquiring a world outlook in the
place of the more limited views that had hitherto framed the
ordinary political imagination, and they were being taught Basic
English as a lingua franca.  In ten wonderful years the Transport
Control had grown far beyond the scale of any of the great Trusts or
Controls of the opening years of the century.  It had created a
world currency.  But it was still far from "owning the earth".  Its
own produce did not exceed an eighth of all the outside stuff that
it bought and sold.  Its own production was mainly fuel, metals and
mechanisms.  Food it bought, timber, vegetable oils, crude rubber,
for example.  Several hundred millions of human beings were still
self–subsisting, quite out of its scheme, or dealing with it only
for a few manufactured articles and mass produced commodities.  And
other hundreds of millions were rapidly developing, or rather
recovering, a collateral productivity in relation to or in rivalry
with its activities.</p><p>The chief difficulties before the Modern State movement arose out
of this parallel to its own rapid success.  It was calling into
existence a mass of exterior prosperity far beyond its immediate
power of assimilation.  Propagandists and teachers, advisory
traders and competent directive agents are not made in a day.
The strain upon the supply of ability, loyalty, and complete
understanding in the movement was already being noted in 1970.
In 1972 we hear of a "scrutiny of qualifications", and new rules
were made for the lapsing and expulsion of incompetent and
unsatisfactory Fellows.  The controlling staff had to be enlarged
continually, and the supply of men with the necessary character,
knowledge of group psychology and understanding of the constructive
theory of the movement was limited.</p><p>"Let us serve", said Fedor Galland, who was already becoming a
leading spirit upon the World Council, in a speech that was
circulated in 1973; "let us not fall into factions; let us not
group ourselves.  We cannot afford bickering; we must not thwart
and waste each other.  We have done no more as yet than make a
start.  Remember the strangulation of Russia by Stalin.  Remember
those excellent chapters of De Windt against the spirit of
opposition.  The struggle for the Modern State has only begun."</p><p>Here we have the clearest indication that growth strains were
already apparent within the structure of the still infantile Modern
State.</p><p>But if the movement found difficulty in sustaining its internal
unanimity, there was at least this in its favour, that, outside it,
there was no single world–wide framework in which antagonisms could
concentrate.  The old international banking system was dead and
gone, and the new order issued its new money and was free to create
and dominate the financial organization of things.  The old
armament–dealing interests were dead and buried.  The old
nationalist Press systems were dead and already forgotten.  It is
extraordinary with what rapidity this latter aspect of social life
was forgotten, seeing that up to 1940 at any rate it was the
primary medium of collective thought and opinion.  To–day a copy of
a newspaper of any date between 1890 and 1970 is a rare and
precious thing, which has to be protected from carbonization in an
air–proof wrapper.  The Central Board controlled most of the new
paper supplies as well as the now rapidly reviving telegraphic,
telephonic and air transmission systems.</p><p>The resistances and antagonisms it had to encounter, within its
organization and without, were certainly immense, but they were
extremely various; the dangers they developed never came together
into one united danger, never rose to a simultaneous maximum and
produced a supreme crisis.  In this respect or that the advance of
the Modern State might be fought to a standstill and held, but it
was never put entirely upon the defensive, and since it held trade,
money and its ever–spreading efficient common schools in its hands,
time was always on its side.  "If not to–day, to–morrow," said
Arden Essenden.  "But better to–day," said Fedor Galland.</p><p>The rapidity with which the Transport Control of 1965 expanded into
the Modern State octopus of 1975 accounts for quite another group
of difficulties, as well as this initial difficulty of creating a
personnel to keep pace with the perpetually elaborated task.  This
second group of troubles came from the fact that in habit and
spirit the old order of things, the old ideas, the old methods, had
not had time to die.  That old world, blinded and enfeebled by its
own errors, had staggered and fallen down in the Thirties and
Forties, had lain in a coma in the Fifties.  Throughout the Sixties
the new world had come into existence.  But in the brains of all
the men and women alive who were more than forty years old, and in
a great majority of those younger, more or less of the old world
survived.  The revival of human vitality in the Seventies involved
not merely a renascence but a restoration.  Old things came back to
find their habitations still very imperfectly occupied by the new.</p><p>Let us consider what form this opposition had taken and what were
the more serious survivals of the old order—old "state of affairs"
rather than "order"—still in active existence about 1975.  We
shall then have a clue to the history of the next seventy–five
years.</p><p>The task before the Air and Sea Control was essentially to leaven
the whole world to its own pattern.  Within its far–flung tentacles
it embraced and sought to permeate with its own nature, with the
concepts and methods of a commonweal of mutual service, a mass of
some thousands and a half million human beings, still carried on by
inertias established during thousands of generations.  Morowitz
calculates that in 1976 about sixty per cent of this mass was
living directly upon the seasonal cultivation of the soil, and that
two–thirds of this, throughout the temperate zone, was producing
mainly for its own consumption and not for trade.  He thinks this
was a relapse from the state of affairs that obtained about 1910–
1920.  An emancipation from the soil, an abolition of the peasant,
had then been in progress for more than a century.  Large–scale
production, with an abundant use of machines, had so increased the
output per head as to liberate (if it can be called liberation) a
growing proportion of hands for industrial work or unemployment.
But this process had been reversed after 1940.  From that date
onward there was a drift back of workers to the land, to live very
incompetently and wretchedly.</p><p>The abolition of the self–subsisting peasant had been the conscious
objective of Lenin and Stalin in Russia.  The cultivator, with
increasing ease, was to produce fundamental foodstuffs far beyond
his own needs and to receive for his surplus an ever increasing
variety of helps, comforts and amenities.  Millions of the
cultivators in 1910 were cultivating entirely for the market; they
produced cotton, hemp, rubber or what not, and were as dependent on
the provision shop for their food as any townsman.  The social
crash had ended all that.  In the Famished Fifties, as Morowitz
says, everyone was "scratching for food in his own patch".  In the
Sixties the common way of life throughout the world was again
immediate production and consumption.  Only under the direction and
stimulus of the Transport Control did the workers upon the soil
begin to recover the confidence and courage needed to produce
beasts only for sale and crops only for marketing.</p><p>The ambition of the Modern State Fellowship was to become the
landlord of the planet and either to mine, afforest, pasture, and
cultivate directly or to have these tasks performed by responsible
tenants, or groups and associations of tenants under its general
control.  But at the outset it had neither the personnel nor the
power to carry out so fundamental a reconstruction of human
affairs.  The comparative failure of the two Five Year Plans in
Russia had been a useful warning against extravagant propositions.</p><p>The Modern State did not mean, as the old saying goes, "to bite off
more than it could chew".  Its chief missionaries were its traders.
They were more abundant than, and they did not need the same amount
of training as, the Modern State schoolmasters and propagandists.
They went offering contracts and prices to existing or potential
food growers, cotton growers, rubber planters and operable mines;
the Control did its best to guarantee sales and prices to any
surviving factories, and it trusted to the selective power it had
through transport, the new monetary issues, research and technical
education to strengthen its grip as time went on and enable it to
establish a general order in this worldwide mélange of bankrupt
producers and impoverished customers it was restoring to activity.</p><p>At first it made no enquiry as to the ownership of goods that were
brought to its depots; it paid cash and observed its contracts; it
attempted no discriminations between man and man so long as they
delivered the goods and traded square.  Its nuclei and schools were
still propagandist schools in 1975 and quasi independent of the
trading, transport and industrial organizations that endowed them.
But this was only the first stage in the Modern State undertaking.
The next was to be more difficult.</p><p>The student of history must always keep in mind the importance of
lifetime periods in social and political change.  Between 1935 and
1975 was only forty years.  Everywhere old systems of ideas were
still dominating men's brains and still being transmitted to the
young.  Old habits of thought, old values, old patterns of conduct,
that had been put aside, as it were, just as jewels and fine
clothes and many polite usages had been put aside, during the days
of dire need and immediate fear, returned with returning self–
respect.  During the Famished Fifties the full creative scheme of
the Modern State won its way to dominate the imaginations of at
most a few score thousand minds, whose scientific and technical
education had prepared them for it.  After that the propaganda had
been vigorous, but still, even after the Conference of Basra in
1965, the number of brains that could be reckoned as primarily
Modern State makers probably numbered less than a couple of hundred
thousand.</p><p>The subsequent propaganda was still more swift and urgent, but the
new membership was not always of the same thorough quality as the
old.  The society wanted the services of every man or woman it
could incorporate with its Fellowship, but it did not want an
inrush of half prepared adherents, refugees from moral perplexity
requiring guidance, ambitious careerists.  Every new religion,
every church, every organized movement has known this conflict
between the desire for expansion and the dread of dilution.  On the
one hand the Modern State recalled the headlong shallow mass
conversions of Christianity and Islam, which had reduced those
great faiths to a mere superstitious veneer upon barbarism, and on
the other there was the more recent warning of Soviet Russia,
morally and intellectually sterilized at last by the eternal
espionage, censorship and "purges" of the G.P.U.  The central brain
of the Modern State octopus had to steer its world system of
organization between the extremes of rash receptiveness and black
suspicion.  It had to go steadfastly and discreetly and yet it had
to go swiftly.  If, on the one hand, it found presently that its
own Fellowship was not altogether as free as it had been at first
from reactionary weaknesses and traditional sentiments, on the
other it found that its leading ideas, by virtue of its material
successfulness and of continual explicit statement, were spreading
far beyond the limits of its nuclei and its organized teaching.</p><p>In the economic realm there appeared, even from the first,
intimations of a revival of prosperity, a number of developments
that the Society, had it had the necessary resources, would gladly
have nipped in the bud.  It wanted to deal directly with every
primary producer.  To–day that is how things are.  But so soon as
there was a new demand for cotton, for rubber, for pork, wheat,
rice and the like, a multitude of obliging intermediaries appeared
between the negro cotton growers in America, the Sudanese cotton
growers, the local folk who went into the largely abandoned rubber
plantations to collect rubber again, the wheat farmers and
swineherds and ranchmen, and set themselves to collect and handle
the produce for the Control buyers and to distribute Control goods
by retail in return.</p><p>These people, the former business men of the world, emerged from
the slums of decaying towns, from municipal offices, from their own
reluctantly cultivated corners of land, from the dingy retreats of
predatory bands, from small local trading establishments, full of
the sense of trade revival.  They organized loans to the peasants,
contrived advances of material to them, advised them shrewdly, went
officiously to the Control agents for instructions.</p><p>This sort of intervention did not stop at individuals, nor with
advices and promises.  In many parts of the world, in townships and
counties and small states, where a Town Council or Workers' Soviet
or Mayor or Lord of the Manor was in authority, or where mines or
plantations lay abandoned and neglected, the reviving breeze of
buying produced a violent desire in the minds of men to set other
people working for their profit.  There were "Getting to Work
Again" fêtes in America in 1969 to "stimulate local business".</p><p>By 1975, from Manchuria to Cape Colony and from Vancouver to Java,
the old state of affairs—peasants in debt, peasants working to pay
rent, peasants bringing in goods in arrears, fishermen, miners,
factory and gang workers generally, collectors and hunters, the old
immemorial economic life of mankind—was recovering vigour.  Debt
serfdom was returning everywhere.  Rents were rising everywhere.
Everywhere the increasing surplus product was being intercepted
according to time–honoured patterns.  Even slavery was reappearing
in thinly disguised forms.</p><p>It had always been a strong tendency in the old order to utilize
the labour of offenders against the law.  Forced labour seemed so
just and reasonable a punishment that whenever the possibility of
using it profitably appeared the authorities set themselves to
multiply indictable offences and bring luckless people into unpaid
servitude.  In the "classic" age most mines were worked and most
galleys propelled by convicts.  In the late Middle Ages the
Mediterranean shipping waited on the magistrate, and if offenders
did not appear in sufficient numbers they had to be sought for.
Out of the dimness of the Fifties and Sixties into the returning
publicity and activity of this phase of recovery there appeared
everywhere local bosses, chiefs and political gangs inciting and
driving people to the production of marketable goods.  The Supply
Control Report of 1976 on "Conditions of Labour Supplying Goods to
Us" notes the existence of convict labour in North and South
America, on the West Coast of Africa, in Soviet Russia, Central
India, North China, Japan, Java and elsewhere, and states that in
many districts it is hardly distinguishable from kidnapping.</p><p>"The cheapness of human beings", runs the Report, "is once more
impeding the efficient organization of mechanical production.
Outside the range of our own services and factories, there are vast
and increasing masses of people now living at a standard of life
too low and under stresses too urgent for them even to begin to
understand the objectives of the Modern State, and, drawing its
sustenance from their degradation, there is arising again an
intricate tangle of exploiting classes, entrepreneurs, wholesalers,
retailers, money–lenders (lending the local coinages and exchanging
against our notes), politicians, private and corporation lawyers,
investors and landowners, of the most varied types, but all having
one common characteristic, that they put profit before service and
will resist and drive as hard a bargain as they can with our
expanding organization.  These things are returning about as fast
as we are growing."</p><p>The Transport Control Report of the same year notes another system
of troubles arising.  Here the attack on Modern State development
was more direct.  "We are finding the question of way–leaves an
increasing difficulty in the extension of our road net for local
and heavy traffic.  The world, we are told more plainly every day,
is not ours to do with as we like.  Everywhere claimants are
springing up, renascent corporations, local authorities or private
individuals who profess ownership of the soil and demand rents or
monetary compensation from us.  In some cases, where the local
authority was of such a character as to afford a reasonable hope of
its ultimate absorption by our organization, we have been able to
come to an arrangement by which it has taken over the making and
maintenance of the route within the area of its alleged
jurisdiction, but in the majority of instances the resistance is
much more frankly in the nature of a hold–up.  The enquiries of our
social psychologists show a widespread desire for simple or
disguised bribery on the part of the obstructives, though it
has to be admitted that there are many genuine cases of quite
disinterested stupidity.  Few of them realize clearly that they are
demanding bribes or exacting blackmail.  They are obsessed by old–
fashioned ideas of property; almost anything in existence they
imagine can be appropriated as a man's 'own', and then he has an
absolute right to do what he likes with his 'own', deny its use to
the commonweal, destroy it, let it at a rack rent, hold it for some
exorbitant price.</p><p>"Rarely have these obstructives the whole–hearted support of their
communities behind them—so much has to be conceded to the
propaganda of the Modern State and to the general diffusion of our
ideas and the spontaneous appearance of fresh and kindred idea
systems.  We are preparing a schedule of obstructives.  They vary
in scale from the single tiresome litigious individual with an old–
fashioned clutching mind, through a long range of associations,
cities and provincial councils, to the resuscitated sovereign
governments of the war period.  Two royal families have been
exhumed from their retirement in the German–speaking part of Europe
and more, it is said, are to follow.  On various of our routes,
notably on the Bordeaux–Black Sea road, the old Chinese claim for
'likin' has reappeared.  Our lorries have been held up at
Ventimiglia, where a 'dogana' has been erected by the Fascist
government in Rome, a barrier has been put across the track, and
payments have been demanded in the name of the King of Italy.
There have also been demands for Octroi dues outside some French
and Italian towns.</p><p>"A legal committee of the Modern State Faculty of Social Psychology
is taking up the question of these new impediments to world revival
and unification, and it will prepare a plan of action in the course
of the next month.  This attempt to revive the proprietary
strangulation which ended the old order is irritating and may
develop into very grave obstruction.  The former world system of
ownership and administration was in complete liquidation before
1960, and we have no intention of buying it out at anything above
scrap rates.  We deny absolutely any claim to enhanced values
created by our restoration of production and commerce."</p></section><footer/></body></html>