<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>8: The Second Conference at Basra, 1978</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch03s07.xhtml" title="7: Intellectual Antagonism to the Modern State"/><link rel="next" href="ch03s09.xhtml" title="9: &quot;Three Courses of Action&quot;"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="8: The Second Conference at Basra, 1978" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646970120"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">8: The Second Conference at Basra, 1978</h2></div></div></div><p>The second Conference at Basra, though many of its prominent
figures had already played leading rôles in the earlier gathering
in 1965, was very different in scale, scope and spirit from that
assembly.  It was an older gathering.  The average age, says Amen
Rihani, was a full ten years higher.  Young men were still coming
into the Fellowship abundantly, but there had also been accessions—
and not always very helpful accessions—of older men who had been
radical and revolutionary leaders in the war period.  Their frame
of experience had shaped them for irresponsible resistance.  Their
mental disposition was often obstructively critical and
insubordinate.  Many had had no sort of technical experience.  They
were disposed to throw an anarchistic flavour over schools and
propaganda.</p><p>Moreover, the great scheme of the Modern State had now lost
something of its first compelling freshness.  The "young men of
'65" had had ten years of responsible administrative work.  They
had been in contact with urgent detail for most of that period.
They had had to modify De Windt's generalizations in many
particulars, and the large splendour of the whole project no longer
had the same dominating power over their minds.  They had lost
something of the professional esprit de corps, the close intimate
confidence with each other, with which they had originally embarked
upon the great adventure of the Modern State.  Many had married
women of the older social tradition and formed new systems of
gratification and friendship.  They had ceased to be enthusiastic
young men and they had become men of the world.  The consequent
loss of a sure touch upon primary issues was particularly evident
in the opening sessions.</p><p>Moreover, the atmosphere of the 1965 gathering had been purely a
Modern State atmosphere.  Except for the Russian political
representatives, there had been no antagonism at all to its general
purposes, and there had been few people in Basra who were not
Fellows of the Modern State Society or closely sympathetic with its
aims.  But now the reviving nationalisms, the resuscitating social
and commercial interests of the moribund old world system, were
acutely aware of the immense significance of events at Basra, and
there had gathered an assemblage of delegations, reporters,
adventurers, friends and camp followers of every description, far
exceeding the numbers of the actual Fellows.  They crowded the
Control rest houses that clustered about the aerodrome, they
invaded the offices and residences of the Controls, they stimulated
the private enterprise hotels and restaurants that had recently
sprung up among the date palms and rice fields of the environs, to
an unprecedented congestion and liveliness, and multitudes of them
had to be accommodated in tents and houseboats.  A number of
thirty–year–old hulls of passenger liners were fitted for their
accommodation.  Observers were reminded of the tourist period of
the First Age of General Prosperity when they saw these uninvited
visitors, chaffering with the old–world Bagdad carpet traders and
Arab nomads who had also been attracted by the gathering.</p><p>There would probably have been a far greater multitude drawn to
Basra if the Transport Control had not realized in time the social
and hygienic dangers of too great a gathering, and had refused
passages and limited bookings.  Casual individuals were eliminated
as much as possible, and all over the world groups of stranded
pilgrims found themselves unable to get further on the journey.</p><p>The most serious of these invaders were the delegations of enquiry
sent by the reawakening sovereign governments of the old order.
These were half diplomatic, half official–expert, teams, and they
came with the declared intention of challenging the activities of
the Controls in their several territories.  They proposed to
legalize and regulate the Controls.  They had no formal standing in
the Conference; they had invited themselves and given the
Conference organizers notice of their coming.  "Better now than
later," said the Modern State officials, and accepted notice and
provided accommodation.  "We have to have things out with them,"
Williams Kapek wrote to Isabel Garden (The Kapek Garden Letters.
Historical Documents Series: Basra II 9376).</p><p>Beside these "old government" agencies there were a number of
parties claiming to represent various new business combines and
interests that were setting up in frank competition with the
Control monopolies.  There were a number of lawyers of the older
type, men in sharp contrast and antagonism to the younger legists
of the new American school.  The contrast of the two types, the
older all pomp and dodges and the younger all candour and science,
is dwelt upon lengthily by Kapek.</p><p>"This Conference is essentially a conference on Scientific and
Mercantile Communications and Associated Questions, similar to that
held at Basra in 1965"; so ran a printed notice circulated to all
the visitors who could claim any representative status.  "Its
discussions are open only to the Fellows of the faculties of the
Modern State Society.  They are not public discussions and their
reports are for the use of Fellows only.  But it would be
disingenuous to deny that the decisions arrived at may affect the
general welfare of mankind profoundly, and since you come to
present criticisms, claims and proposals presumably in that
interest, the committee of organization of the Conference will do
all it can to facilitate meetings between your group and the
faculty or faculties affected.  Unfortunately the accommodation for
meetings in Basra will be greatly strained by the needs of the
actual Conference, and the committee can do little to arrange
conferences between the immense variety of accredited bodies that
have made an appearance, much less to arrange for their pleasures
and comforts during the period of this assembly.  The committee
regrets that it does not consider the proposal of the committee of
Bagdad citizens, claiming to represent the government of Irak, to
police this unexpected World Fair with 300 Arab policemen, a camel
corps of seventy–nine men and six machine–guns, as a practicable
one.  It has removed this body painlessly to comfortable quarters
in the Island of Ormuz, and the Police of the Air and Sea Ways in
its recognizable uniform will be alone responsible for order in the
ancient province of Bassorah."</p><p>Explicit details of information bureaus, hospital organization,
supply and available accommodation followed.</p><p>It is difficult to see how else the Central Control could have
dealt with this unexpectedly abundant eruption of the old system,
but the various delegations and commissions professed to be
extremely indignant at their reception.  They were of such various
and unequal value, that they found it impossible to fall into any
combined scheme of action.  Since their theory was that the
Controls and the Modern State organization were nothing more than a
sort of world cooperative society, none of them could behave as
diplomatic missions to a sovereign power.  And consequently they
could not regard each other as diplomatic missions.  Their powers
and authorizations were extremely ill–defined.  The bland refusal
of the Conference authorities to concede them meeting–places and
anything but a very limited use of telephonic, cable and radio
communications embarrassed them extremely.</p><p>"I met Sir Horatio Porteous, the British Imperial representative,
in the street," writes Williams Kapek.  "He was very eager to get
my advice upon a point of etiquette.  It seems that we have seized
the province of Bassorah from the government of Irak and made
prisoners of an alleged local police—those fifty lousy camels and
the rest of it I told you about in my last—and that Irak is a
mandatory protectorate under Great Britain.  He wished to put in a
protest somewhere.  'But WHERE?' said he.</p><p>"I adopted a sympathetic tone.  'You see,' said Sir Horatio, 'this
Central Control of yours isn't any damned thing at all!  If it was
a provisional government or something … '</p><p>"I suggested a call on the Air and Sea Police.</p><p>"'But they are acting under orders.  Who gives the orders?  It's
all so damned irregular! … '"</p><p>There was a flutter of calls between the delegations, some "serious
talks" and much drafting of more or less futile minutes, reports
and protests.  The weather was exceptionally hot and dry and such
space and apparatus as was available for exercise and recreation
was monopolized by the more energetic Fellows who were taking part
in the Conference proper.  It was difficult to keep cool, difficult
to keep calm; still more difficult to keep well and hopeful.  Some
few of the intrusive delegates and commissioners took to drinking
hard, but the supply of alcohol was severely limited and the police
had turned practically all the professional ministers of pleasure
out of the province.  On the other hand, the Transport Control, in
a mood of friendly indulgence, started a special service of
pleasure steamers to Bubiyan, outside the jurisdiction of its
police, and there a floating little mushroom town of cafés,
restaurants, houses of pleasure, music halls and shows of every
sort speedily sprung up to minister to the unofficial overflow of
the Conference.</p><p>"Bubiyan is draining us quite pleasantly," wrote Williams Kapek,
"and they say there is quite a boom in entertainment for man and
beast in Babylon and Bagdad.  The old British institution of the
long week–end flourishes and Babylon gets more and more
Babylonian."</p><p>But there were still plenty of outsiders left in Basra to keep the
faculties busy.</p><p>Meanwhile the Conference was going on behind closed doors.  It was
clearly recognized that this curious mélange of agents, delegates
and officials from without its organization was only the first
intimation of the confused antagonisms that were gathering against
the new order.  The policy of expansion and quiet disregard had
lasted long enough.  The pretence of being a Conference upon
communications and associated matters had to be dropped.  The time
had come for the Modern State to define itself and clear up its
relations to the past out of which it had arisen, and to all this
world of tradition which was now rapping at its doors.</p><p>"Before we disperse," said Arden Essenden, who presided at the
first plenary session, "we must admit some at least of these
delegations, hear them and give them answers to take home with
them.  But first we have to know our mind much more clearly.  What
are we now and what do we intend to do?  The days before us begin a
new chapter in human history.  It is for us to choose the heading
and plan that chapter now."</p></section><footer/></body></html>