<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>10: The Life-time Plan</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch03s09.xhtml" title="9: &quot;Three Courses of Action&quot;"/><link rel="next" href="ch03s11.xhtml" title="11: The Real Struggle for Government Begins"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="10: The Life-time Plan" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646981980"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">10: The Life-time Plan</h2></div></div></div><p>It is still a debatable question how far that hard decisive
declaration of the Socialist World–State at Basra was not
premature.  There are those who consider it the most timely of
acts; there are some who believe it should have been made as early
as the first Conference in 1965.  The discussion became involved
with the intellectual and moral conflicts that went on under the
Air Dictatorship.  It mingles with the controversies of to–day.
But certainly, from 1978 onward, the Modern State movement lost
something of its pristine mental freshness, lost openness, lost
much of that almost irresponsible adventurousness that had flung
the network of transport and trading controls so swiftly about the
earth.  "We have swallowed the world, but now we have to digest
it," said Arden Essenden.  The old defiant repudiation of the past
was replaced by a firm and sometimes rather heavy insistence upon
the order of the future.</p><p>There was nowhere any immediate uprising in response to the
proclamation of a World Government.  Although it had been plainly
coming for some years, although it had been endlessly feared and
murmured against, it found no opposition prepared anywhere.
Thirteen years had wrought a profound change in Soviet Russia and
the large areas of China in association with Moscow.  The practical
assimilation of Soviet Transport and Communications was almost
tacitly accepted.  The details of the amalgamation were entrusted
to committees flying between Moscow and Basra.  All over the world,
wherever there was any sort of governing or managing body not
already associated with the Modern State System, it fell to
debating just how and to what extent it could be incorporated or
how it could resist incorporation.  Everywhere there were Modern
State nuclei ready to come into conference and fully informed upon
local or regional issues.  The plain necessity for a systematic
"renucleation" of the world became evident.  The "Section of
Training and Advertisement" had long since worked out the broad
lines of a modus vivendi between the old and the new.</p><p>That modus vivendi is called variously The Life Time Plan or—with
a memory of that pioneer effort in planning, The Five Year Plan of
the Russian Dictatorship—The Thirty Year Plan.  Independent
businesses that respected certain standards of treatment by the
workers, which would accept a certain amount of exterior control,
technical and financial, and which maintained a certain standard of
efficiency, were to be accorded not simply tolerance but a
reasonable protection.  Even if their methods were suddenly
superseded by new devices, they were to be kept running until they
could be wound up, their products were still to be taken by the
Controls.  This was far better treatment than was ever accorded
superseded producers under the smash–and–grab conditions of the
competitive system.  In the same way, whenever possible the small
owning peasant or the agricultural tenant was not dispossessed; he
was given a fixed price for his output, counselled or directed in
the matter of improvements and so merged by bearable degrees into
the class of agricultural workers.  This, as Rupert Bordinesco put
it (Brief Explanation: Historical Documents Series 1969), gave them
"time to die out".  Because it was an integral part of the Life
Time Plan that the new generation should be educated to develop a
service mentality in the place of a proprietary mentality.  There
were to be no independent merchants or independent cultivators
under twenty in 1980, none under thirty in 1990 and none under
forty in 2000.  This not only gave the old order time to die out;
it gave the new order time to develop the more complex system of
direction, mechanism and delivery it needed soundly and healthily.
The lesson of the mental discords and tragic disproportions in the
headlong development of the first Russian Five Year Plan—
disproportions as monstrous and distressful as the hypertrophies
and atrophies of the planless "Capitalist System" of the nineteenth
century—had been marked and learnt.</p><p>It did not trouble the World Council that to retain millions of
small businesses and tens of millions of small cultivators the
whole world over for so long meant a much lower efficiency of
production.  "These older people have to be fed and employed,"
wrote Bordinesco, "and now they will never learn or be able to
adapt themselves to a novel routine of life.  Help them to do their
job a little better.  Save them from the smart people who want to
prey upon them—usurers, mortgagers, instalment salesmen,
intimidators, religious or secular; and for the rest—leave them in
peace."</p><p>The Brief Explanation also drew a moral from the "Period of Glut"
in the Twenties, which preceded the collapse of the Thirties, when
the whole world was full of unconsumed goods and unemployed people.
This, Bordinesco pointed out, was the inevitable consequence of an
unregulated progressive system of private enterprise.  "There is no
sense in throwing a man out of an employment, however old–
fashioned, unless there is a new job for him.  There is no sense in
bringing children into the world unless there is education,
training and useful work for them to do.  We have to see that each
new generation is arranged numerically in different categories of
training and objective from those of its predecessor.  The Russians
learnt this necessity in their great experiment.  As we progress
towards a scientific production of primary substances, the actual
proportion of agricultural workers, miners, forest wardens,
fishermen and so forth in the community must fall.  So also the
proportion of ordinary industrial workers must fall.  The heavy
industries will precede the light in that.  A certain compensation
will be caused by a steady rise in the standard of living and
particularly by what De Windt called 'the rebuilding of the world',
new cities, new roads, continually renewed houses everywhere."
(This was foreshadowed to a certain extent by the French plan for
"Outillage National" and the German housing schemes in operation as
early as the late Twenties, plans and schemes ultimately strangled
by the budget–balancing fanatics.)  But even that diversion of
energy from the production of basic materials and small commodities
to big structural undertakings would not suffice to use up the
continually released human power in the community.  At this point
appeared what Bordinesco called the "enlarging categories", which
were to consume more than they gave.  There had to be increasing
numbers of people engaged in education, in the developing and
ordering of knowledge, in experimental science, in artistic
production, in making life more abundant and ample.  To that
expansion no limit could be set.</p><p>"We men have a lease of this planet," runs the Brief Explanation,
"for some millions of years.  It is foolish not to press on to
better life, but it is more foolish to hurry frantically and
cruelly.  The history of the past two centuries is one sustained
warning against the disemployment of men and women for whom there
is no other use.  Before we teach, our teachers have to learn;
before we direct comprehensively, we must have experience in
direction.  We must always be attempting a little more than we can
do, but we must not be attempting the impossible.  We must advance
without needless delay, but without waste, hurry, or cruelty.  Do
not be fearful or jealous of the advent of the new conditions.  No
honest worker, man or woman, has anything to fear from the coming
of the Modern State."</p></section><footer/></body></html>