<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>11: The Real Struggle for Government Begins</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch03s10.xhtml" title="10: The Life-time Plan"/><link rel="next" href="ch04.xhtml" title="Book the Fourth"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="11: The Real Struggle for Government Begins" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268641176820"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">11: The Real Struggle for Government Begins</h2></div></div></div><p>But the rulers of the new World–State, as their enlargements of the
Air and Sea Police made manifest, were under no illusion that the
new order could be established in the world by declarations and
"Brief Explanations", and hard upon its proposals for conferences
and assimilations came the organization of its local constabularies
and the regulations that made the reorganized nuclei the sole means
of communication of independent local authorities, businesses and
individuals with the central Controls.  In nearly every part of the
earth the nuclei had prepared a personnel of sympathizers and
auxiliaries, varying in character with local conditions, outside
the ranks of the Fellowship.  The khaki uniform of the street and
road guardians, differing very little then from the one familiar to
us to–day, appeared as if by magic all over the world, and the
symbol of the winged disc broke out upon aeroplanes, post offices,
telephone and telegraph booths, road signs, transport vehicles and
public buildings.  There was still no discord with Russia; there
the blazon of the wings was put up side by side with the old hammer
and sickle.</p><p>Nowhere at first was there any armed insurrectionary movement.  We
realize from this how complete had been the collapse of the
organized patriotic states of the World War period.  They had no
national newspapers, no diplomats, no Foreign Offices any more.
There had been no paper for the former and there had been no
salaries for the latter.  Lacking vocal organs, nationalism as such
was silenced.  There were, however, protests, in a considerable
variety of ineffectiveness, from local self–appointed bodies, and
much passive resistance and failure to comply.  But even the
removal of the winged sign was infrequent, and usually where that
occurred nothing further ensued when the air police came whirring
out of the sky to replace it.</p><p>This phase of tacit acquiescence was, however, only temporary,
until the opposition could gather itself into new forms and phases
and discover methods of organization.  The elements of antagonism
were abundant enough.  The Fascist garrison in Rome, claiming to be
the government of all Italy, was one of the earliest to make its
challenge.  It had a number of airmen, unlicensed for various
reasons by the Transport Control, and it now sent a detachment of
its Black Shirts to occupy the new aeroplane factory outside the
old Roman town of Turin, and to seize a small aerodrome and
whatever air material was to be found in it at Ostia.  The winged
disc at these two places was replaced by the national fasces.  A
proclamation was made and disseminated as widely as the restricted
means of publication permitted, calling for an assembly of the old
League of Nations and reviving a long defunct phrase of President
Wilson's, "the self–determination of peoples."  The King of Italy,
after a diligent search, was found inoffensively farming in
Piedmont, and the long closed palace of the Quirinal was reopened
and made habitable for him.</p><p>The new air police had been waiting with a certain impatience for
provocation of this sort.  It had been equipped with a new type of
gas bomb releasing a gas called Pacificin, which rendered the
victim insensible for about thirty–six hours and was said to have
no further detrimental effect.  With this it now proceeded to
"treat" the long resented customs house at Ventimiglia and the
factory and aerodrome in dispute.</p><p>At Ostia the police planes found a complication of the situation.</p><p>An extraordinary ceremony was in progress in the aerodrome.  Three
new aeroplanes had just been brought thither from the Turin
factory, and they were being blessed by the Pope (Pope Alban III).</p><p>For the still vital Catholic Church had always been given to the
blessing of implements, shops, boats, bridges, automobiles, flags,
guns, battleships, new buildings and the like.  It was a ceremony
that advertised the Church, gratified the faithful, and did no
perceptible harm to the objects blessed.  And this particular
occasion had been made something of a demonstration against the
World Council.  The Pope had come; the King and the reigning Duce
were present.  Sound films made only a few minutes before the
arrival of the air police show a gathering as brilliant, with its
uniforms and canonicals, as anything that might have occurred
before the World War.  Choristers in cassocks and charming little
lace collars chant, acolytes swing censers; the venerable Holy
Father sits on a throne under a canopy, on a large crimson–draped
platform.  There was a muster of at least three thousand Black
Shirts.</p><p>The action of the Council commander, Luigi Roselli, was precipitate.</p><p>The subsequent enquiry intimates pretty clearly that he betrayed
anti–clerical bias.  He had been chosen for this task because he
was himself an Italian, and so, it was thought, less likely to
exacerbate any latent nationalist feeling.  (It is an interesting
sidelight on the times that the Fascist commandatore on the ground
was Mario Roselli, his elder half–brother.)  His general
instructions had been to seize the aerodrome and the aeroplanes
with as little violence as possible.  The Pacificin was only to be
used in case of armed resistance.  But the sight of the cassocks,
the birettas, the canopies and ornaments and robes, the sound of
chanting and the general ecclesiastical atmosphere were too much
for the young man's prejudices.  His squadron circled in formation
over the aerodrome.  The ceremony proceeded with dignity in spite
of the noise of his propellers.  For it seemed incredible that any
human being would dare to gas the Pope.</p><p>"Let go," said Luigi Roselli, too malicious to realize the
brutality of his outrage.</p><p>The gas containers came crashing into the arena.</p><p>"Just for a moment," says one of the aviators concerned, in a
memorable letter, "the chanting rose louder.  They showed pluck,
those priests.  Hardly one of them broke ranks.  Then they crumpled
up in their places, drifting down on their knees for the most part.
It was queer the way you saw the gas spreading among them; it was
like a bed of flowers dying and the death spreading out from a lot
of centres.  The old boy on the throne didn't turn a hair.  He had
his hands together and his head bowed.  You couldn't tell when it
took him.  The Fascist guard and the King's party weren't anything
like so dignified.  They gesticulated, they yelled.  They were
defiant and all that.  And some ran about a bit before the stuff
got them.</p><p>"Of course, you must understand, the whole lot thought they were
being killed.  None of them could have known anything of this new
stuff.  WE didn't know until a fortnight ago.</p><p>"We had no gas masks on our bird, so I didn't take part in the
landing party which seized the new 'planes.</p><p>"The last I saw of that aerodrome, it looked like some old Turkish
carpet, gone threadbare in places but still with some brightish
patches.  Perfect garden of sleep.  I hope nobody robbed any of
them before they came to.  But Roselli, I believe, dropped proper
instructions about it all in Rome…."</p><p>Unhappily the raid had not been so completely bloodless as this
young man supposed.  A youthful priest, Odet Buanarotti, had been
struck on the head by one of the glass containers and killed
outright.  He was subsequently canonized; the last saint and martyr
to be inscribed in the Latin hagiography….</p><p>At this point Raven's written transcript breaks off abruptly.</p></section><footer/></body></html>