<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>5: The First Conference at Basra: 1965</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch03s04.xhtml" title="4: Prophets, Pioneers, Fanatics and Murdered Men"/><link rel="next" href="ch03s06.xhtml" title="6: The Growth of Resistance to the Sea and Air Ways Control"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="5: The First Conference at Basra: 1965" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646917200"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">5: The First Conference at Basra: 1965</h2></div></div></div><p>The conference of scientific and technical workers at Basra in 1965
is regarded by historians as a cardinal date in the emergence of
the Modern State.  It was organized by the Transport Union, which
had begun as a loose association of the surviving aeroplane and
shipping operators for mutual aid and protection.  The ideas
formulated at this conference—and even those were still formulated
with a certain tentative or tactful incompleteness—had been
gathering force and definition for some time.  But this conference
was the first to draw up a definite plan of the general human
outlook and initiate an organization to carry it out.  It marked
the transition from thought to action in general affairs.</p><p>The idea of using air transport as the combining and directive
force for a new synthesis of civilization was already an old and
familiar one.  It had been in men's thoughts for at least thirty
years.  A popular story published in 1933, Man's Mortality (by the
English romancer Michael Arlen, 1895–1990), for instance, is an
amusing fantasy of the world dominated by an air–transport
syndicate.  It is still a very readable book and interesting in
showing the limitations of the educated imagination at that time.
The belief in the possibilities of invention is unbounded; air
velocities and air fighting are described on a scale that still
seems preposterously exaggerated to–day; while on the other hand
the inflated stock buying and selling of that period, although it
had grown from the merest germ in about a century and a half, is
represented as still going on unchanged, and the world's air
dictators are gambling dishonestly in stock, and at last "crash"
financially and bolt as though they were just contemporary
politicians and mystery men rather than lords of the whole power of
the air.  In a world of incredible metals, explosives and
swiftness, the Stock Exchange, the Bourses, still survive.  And
there are still Powers and Foreign Policies!  Nothing could
illustrate better the inability of people at that time to realize
the economic and political changes that were then actually tumbling
upon them.  For some obscure reason mental and moral progress and
institutional invention seemed absolutely impossible to them.</p><p>An interesting little London periodical of the same time, Essential
News, has recently been reprinted for graduate students of history
in the Students' Reprint Series.  Its fourth issue (February 4th,
1933) contains a summary of contemporary thought about World Air
Control.  It cites a complete scheme for the "International"
control of aviators, drawn up by a small French group at the
suggestion of M. Henri de Jouvenal under the presidency of M.
Pierre Denis.  A Union Aéronautique Internationale is proposed, a
cosmopolitan air transport company.  Linked with this and
controlled by the poor League of Nations, an "Air Force for Mutual
Assistance" was to police the atmosphere.  The proposals are so
plainly Utopian and impracticable in the face of the sovereign
state system as to seem insincere.  It was only thirty years later,
after the common suicide of the sovereign Powers of Europe, that
the assembled technicians at Basra could revive the broad
conception of this proposal.</p><p>This first conference at Basra was distinguished from its
predecessors first by its universality and then by the extremely
bold and comprehensive proposals for united action it accepted—
proposals which were in effect, if not in form, the project for the
modern World–State.  It was the first of these gatherings attended
by considerable American, Chinese and Japanese contingents, as well
as the customary European representatives, and the Russian
technicians were present in unprecedented strength and unexpectedly
united and independent of the political controllers who accompanied
them.  New Zealand also had reappeared in the world's affairs.
There were even two representatives (two schoolmasters in the
Social Psychology section) from Iceland, which for most practical
purposes had been cut off from the world for over five years.  And
one has only to compare the agenda of this and previous assemblies
to feel at once the stride forward in the scope and courage of
scientific and technical thought that had occurred.</p><p>It was a young gathering; the average age is estimated by Amen
Rihani as about thirty–three, and five or six women attended in the
social and educational branches.  A third but very significant
feature was the extensive use of that simple and convenient lingua
franca of the aviators, Basic English.  Even the native English–
speaking people present did their best to keep their speeches
within the limitations of that ingenious idiom.</p><p>The master section was still that of General Transport.  The body
which had organized the gathering was, as has been said already,
the Transport Union, originally a purely business body, but the
inspiration was that of the Modern State movement, and technicians
in medicine, education, agriculture and every main type of
industrial production were present.  There was much discussion of
the upkeep of the world routes and the administrative tasks arising
out of that.  Nothing could give the student a more vivid sense of
the derelict state of the world at that time than the boldness with
which this Control took possession of things and pushed its
activities into new fields.  It was decided, for instance, that all
existing aerodromes and landmarks, lights and lighting fields,
should be directly under its management.  There was no question of
purchase; it took them over.  Every aeroplane in the world was to
be registered, was to carry a distinctive number, respect the
common tariff of charges and pay a registration fee to the Control.
Airships and aeroplanes which did not do this were to be treated as
pirates, denied the use of aerodromes and filling stations, and
"driven out of the air".  They were to be driven out of the air if
necessary by an "air police" which the Control was to organize.
Aerodromes or regions that harboured such recalcitrants were to be
boycotted.</p><p>These proposals were not accepted without discussion.  But there
was very little protest against what was certainly, from the older
point of view, an illegal usurpation of authority.  The political
members of the Russian contingent offered the chief resistance, and
what other opposition appeared was not from aviators, engineers,
chemists, biologists or men of that type, but from sociologists and
economists of the less advanced schools.  The main objection took
the form of a question:  "But what will governments say to this?"
So far as the Westerners and Chinese were concerned there was a
disposition to disregard the possibility of political intervention.
"Wait till it comes," they said cheerfully.  But Soviet Russia and
Soviet Japan were at that time much more rankly political than the
rest of the world, and they at least had politicians as well as men
of skill and science present at this gathering.  A long speech was
made by the commissar Vladimir Peshkoff, full of the menace of
later trouble.  He denounced the projected Control as an insidious
attempt to restore a capitalist trust in the world.  Its psychology
would be bourgeois and capitalist.  Moscow would never consent to
the passage of controlled machines over the vast territories under
Soviet control nor allow the exploitation of the resources of
Russia in oil and minerals by any outside organization.</p><p>"And how will Moscow prevent it?" asked Ivan Englehart, a Russian
aviator and aeroplane builder, rising as Peshkoff sat down.  "Is it
a nationalism of this sort that the Third International is to end?"</p><p>By way of reply Peshkoff leant towards him and spat out in Russian,
"Wait until you return to Moscow."</p><p>"I may have to wait a little time," said Englehart.  "I am a
citizen of the world, and I shall go back to Russia in my own time
and in my own fashion."</p><p>"This is treason.  Wait until Moscow hears of this!"</p><p>"And how and when will Moscow hear of this?"</p><p>"Very soon."</p><p>Englehart was standing a few yards from Peshkoff.  He shook his
head with a sceptical smile.  He spoke gently, like a man who had
long prepared himself for such an occasion.</p><p>"You flew here, Tavarish Peshkoff, in my squadron.  How do you
propose to return?"</p><p>Peshkoff rose to his feet, realized the blank want of sympathy in
the gathering, spluttered and sat down again in unconcealed dismay.</p><p>Englehart waited for a moment or so and then went on, choosing his
words with quiet deliberation, to assure the meeting of the
adhesion of the Russian technicians to the projected Control.
"That phantom Proletarian of yours fades with all the other empires
and kingdoms," he said to the political delegates his colleagues.
"We are only giving shape to a new world order that is already
born."</p><p>His speech set the key for most of the subsequent debate.</p><p>That establishment of the Control was the backbone discussion, but
it was no more than the backbone of a plan that covered the whole
future organization of society; upon it was articulated a whole
framework of structural proposals.  The central section dealt not
only with the air network but with the organization of every type
of communication.  The lighthouses, lightships, sea marks, channels
and harbours of the world were suffering from a decade of economy,
a decade of wartime destruction and a decade of chaos and decay.
The meteorological services were no longer operative.  All this had
to be restored.  The definite abandonment of every type of railroad
was accepted as a matter of course.  Railways were buried at Basra
forever.  And the restoration and reconstruction of production in a
hundred essential industries followed also as a necessary
consequence of these primary resolutions.</p><p>The more the reader scrutinizes the agenda, the more is he
impressed by the mildness of the official title of the gathering:
"A Conference on Scientific and Mercantile Communications and
Associated Questions".  It is clear that the conveners resolved
to press on with their task of world reorganization as far as
they possibly could, without rousing the enfeebled and moribund
political organizations of the past to obstruction and interference.
The language throughout is that of understatement; the shape of the
projects is fearlessly bold.  A committee of experts had prepared a
very good general survey of the natural resources of the planet,
including those of the already suspicious Russia, and the conference
set itself unhesitatingly to work out the problems of a resumption
of production generally, with an entire disregard of the various
proprietary claims that might arise to challenge the realization of
these schemes.  There was no provocative discussion of these claims;
they were ignored.  The Sea and Air Ways Control evidently meant
to take effective possession not only of all derelict ports,
aerodromes, coal–mines, oil wells, power stations and mines, but to
bring those in which a certain vitality still lingered into line
with its schemes by hook or by crook, by persuasion or pressure.
Its confidence in its solidarity with the skilled men working these
latter establishments was absolute.  Such a solidarity would have
been inconceivable thirty years before.  Financial adventure had
been washed out of the minds of the new generation of technicians
altogether.  They simply wanted to "get things going again".  Ideas
of personal enrichment were swamped in their universal conviction
that their class must now either work together and master the world,
or leave it.</p><p>So with a modest air of logical necessity, of being driven rather
than driving, the Conference spread its planning far beyond the
material and mechanism of world intercommunication.</p><p>What is this reconstructed transport to carry?  How is it to be
fed—and paid for?  About the air–ports everywhere were tracts and
regions sinking back to that primordial peasant cultivation which
had been the basis of all the barbaric civilizations of the past.
The question of the expropriation of the peasant and the
modernization of agricultural production was taken up at Basra at
the point where Lenin and Stalin had laid it down, defeated.  The
Conference was lucidly aware that upon the same planet at the same
time you cannot have both an aviator and a starveling breeding
peasantry, toiling endlessly and forever in debt.  One or other has
to go, and the fundamental objective of the Conference was to make
the world safe for the former.  The disappearance of the latter
followed, not as a sought–after end but as a necessary consequence.
And the disappearance of as much of the institutions of the past as
were interwoven with it.</p><p>In the ideas of their relations to each other and to the world as a
whole, these Basra technicians were all what the nineteenth century
would have called socialistic.  They were so fundamentally
socialistic that they did not even raise the question of socialism.
It is doubtful if the word was ever used before.  They took it for
granted that this Control that was growing like a limitless polyp
in their minds would be the effectual owner and exploiter of all
the aeroplanes, routes, industrial townships, factories, mines,
cultivations that were falling into place in their Plan.  It would
have seemed as unnatural to them that a new Ford or a new
Rockefeller should arise to own a factory or a mine personally, as
that anyone should try to steal the ocean or the air.  There it was
for the common good, and just as much was industrial plant for the
common good.</p><p>All these men it must be remembered, almost without exception, were
men of the salaried type of mind.  They had been born and brought
up in a tradition in which money was a secondary matter.  From the
beginning of the mechanical age, the men of science, the technical
experts, the inventors and discoverers, the foremen and managers
and organizers, had been essentially of the salariat.  Some few had
dabbled in finance and grown rich, but they were exceptions.
Before the World War indeed these sort of men had been accustomed
to accept the acquisitive and gambling types, the powerful rich and
owning people, as a necessary evil.  Now they were manifestly a
totally unnecessary evil, and without the least vindictiveness or
animosity plans were made to do without them and prevent their
return.  The Basra Conference would as soon have considered a
return of Foreign Offices or of Kings or Divinities.</p><p>But they had to consider—and this was the work of a powerful
section upon which the Americans were exceptionally active—how the
wealth of the world that they meant to restore had to be distributed
for consumption, and how a close–knit world organization was to be
reconciled with personal freedom and particularly with artistic and
literary initiatives.  This was entitled the Section of Wages,
Charges and Supply.</p><p>There seems to have been the completest agreement that the only way
of combining service with private liberty is by the use of money.
Without money there is necessarily a dictation of consumption and a
dictation of movement to the worker.  He would be given "what was
good for him".  But money generalized the claim of the worker as
worker, and the claim of the citizen as shareholder in the
commonweal, upon the goods, pleasures, facilities and liberties of
life.  You take your money and you buy this or that, or go here or
there, or do whatever you please.  But there were dangers in this
invention; twice in history money had failed mankind and a money–
linked order had crashed.  This time, they thought, mankind had
learnt its lesson, and a new money had to be devised that would be,
in any large sense, fool–proof, sneak–proof and scoundrel–proof.
So much lay beneath the intention of the Section of Wages, Charges
and Supply.</p><p>This section carried the question of money into regions that would
have seemed quite outside its scope thirty years before.  In the
Twenties and Thirties of the century, and indeed into the war
troubles of the Forties, there had been a great volume of
discussion about money.  Men had realized its dangers and set
themselves, with the energy born of a sense of crisis, to the
analysis of its progresses and the invention of new methods that
should prevent the gross accumulation of ownership, the mischievous
manipulation of credit, the relative impoverishment of the worker
and the strangulation of enterprise that had wrecked the second
monetary civilization.  Gradually it had been realized that there
could be no Theory of Money that was not in fact a complete theory
of social organization.  The Conference set itself now to a
prepared and simplified task.</p><p>The interdependence of monetary theory with the general theory of
property and social structure, which had hardly been suspected by
their fathers, was now universally recognized.  There was a
considerable contingent of young lawyers present, though it would
have amazed the previous generation beyond measure to find them in
the ranks of technologists and men of science.  They knocked the
dust of centuries off the idea of ownership in these very pregnant
debates.  We have already mentioned the surprise of Nicholson at
the new sort of law schools he found in America.  At Basra the
products of these schools were very much to the fore, together with
several older teachers from the London School of Economics, which
flourished until the landslide of 1968.  These new lawyers, with
their fundamentally scientific habits of mind, were amazingly
unlike their professional predecessors—those obstinate, cunning
and terrible old sinners who played so large a part in the economic
strangulation of the United States and the frustration of all the
high hopes of their founders.  They had completely abandoned the
pretence that the business of the law was to protect private
property, exact debts and maintain a false appearance of equity
between man and man.  They knew that justice without equality of
status and opportunity can be nothing more than a sham, and their
ideas were already completely based on our current conception of
law as the regulative system in the network of relationships
between the human commonweal and its subordinate corporations and
individuals.  They were entirely contemptuous of any claims,
contracts, rules and precedents that impeded the free expansion of
human welfare.  Among all the various types that gathered at Basra,
these younger lawyers, in close touch with the new economists on
the one hand and the group psychologists on the other, and inspired
by a political constructiveness of the boldest sort, were certainly
the most remarkable.</p><p>It is chiefly to them that we owe the firm assertion by the Basra
Conference of the principle that in a modern community there can be
no individual property in anything but personal belongings and
money.  This was thrown out as something too obvious to discuss.
Houses and lands were henceforth to be held on leases of a not too
lengthy period, life tenure being the longest.  All other tangible
things, they assumed, belonged inalienably to the world commonweal—
in the usufruct of which every human being was manifestly a
shareholder.  And it was these younger lawyers also who did the
greater part of that task of disentanglement and simplification,
which reduced money to its present and only proper use as a check
for consumable goods and services, either paid out to the
individual, or, in the case of minors and incapables, to the
individual's guardians, either as a part of the racial inheritance
or else as wages for work in the common service.  The world was to
be reborn without usury or monetary speculation.</p><p>The monetary methods of the world at that time were in a state of
such complete chaos that there was no effective system in working
order anywhere to present an immediate resistance to the operation
of the new ideas.  Every region was running its own, often very
arbitrary and primitive, system of tokens and checks.  But the
revival of communications that had made Basra possible was already
giving an increasing prestige to what was known as the "air–
dollar".  This was not a metallic coin at all; it was a series of
paper notes, which represented distance, weight, bulk, and speed.
Each note was good for so many kilograms in so much space, for so
many kilometres at such a pace.  The value of an air–dollar had
settled down roughly to a cubic metre weighing ten kilograms and
travelling two hundred kilometres at a hundred kilometres an hour.</p><p>This was already an energy unit and not a unit of substance, such
as the old world standards had always been.  It marked very
definitely that the old static conceptions of human life with
limited resources were giving place to kinetic ideas of a
continually expanding life.  The air–dollar was a unit of energy in
terms of transport, and its transformation into the energy dollar
of our daily life to–day was already sketched out clearly by the
Basra experts, although the actual change over was not accomplished
until ten years later.</p><p>It was the plain, if unformulated, intention of the new Air and Sea
Control to gain possession and exploit all the available sources of
energy in the world as soon as possible, to frame its human balance
sheet, scale its wages and declare its dividends as the common
trustee of mankind, but manifestly if the threat of Peshkoff
materialized, and the Russian Soviet system (or indeed any other
owning group) was able to remain in effective control of its
territorial wealth, the energy dollar would afford a just
unambiguous medium for whatever trade was necessary between the
competing administrations.</p><p>The planning of a new political, industrial, and monetary world
scheme still does not measure the full achievement of this First
Basra Conference.  There was also a strong and vigorous educational
section working in close touch with the technicians and the social
psychologists.  It made plans not only for the coordination of the
surviving colleges and technical schools in the world and for the
revivification of those that had lapsed, but it set itself
definitely to the task of that propaganda of the idea of the Modern
State which is the substantial content of our existing fundamental
education.  This was dealt with by the Section of Training and
Advertisement.  Basic English was to lay the foundations of a world
lingua franca.  Evidently wherever the influence of the Air and Sea
Control extended, a new propaganda, a new Press, and new common
schools were to extend.  There can be little doubt that most of the
teachers at Basra already saw quite clearly ahead of them the
world–wide mental and social order in which we live to–day.  They
knew what they were doing.  They went back from this gathering
encouraged and confirmed, to give themselves to the terrific and
exalting adventure before them, to the evocation day by day, and
idea by idea, of a new civilization amidst the distressful,
slovenly, and still living wreckage of the old.</p><p>When the Conference at last dispersed two new realities had
appeared in the world, so unobtrusively that it was only slowly
that the mass of mankind realized their significance.  One was the
Central Board, known also as the Sea and Air Control, consolidating
the Transport Union, linking with it the other Controls and
sections, and having its permanent offices at Basra; the other was
the Police of the Air and Sea Ways, at first a modest organization
with about 3,000 aeroplanes, a handful of seaplanes, a hundred
patrol ships, and a personnel of about 25,000 men.  It was a small
body judged by the standards either of preceding or subsequent
times, but at that period it was by far the most powerful armed
force in the world.</p></section><footer/></body></html>