<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>9: "Three Courses of Action"</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch03s08.xhtml" title="8: The Second Conference at Basra, 1978"/><link rel="next" href="ch03s10.xhtml" title="10: The Life-time Plan"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="9: &quot;Three Courses of Action&quot;" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646988080"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">9: "Three Courses of Action"</h2></div></div></div><p>There was no dominant individual of the De Windt character and
quality at the second Basra Conference.  There was no prophetic
direction of the deliberations.  But there was no want of what
used to be called "leadership", and a number of interesting
personalities, the politic Hooper Hamilton; the frank, emphatic
William Ryan; the intricate Shi–lung–tang; M'bangoi, the East
African biologist; Rin Kay, the social psychologist—perhaps the
finest mind in the gathering; Mohini L. Tagore; Morowitz, the
mystical humanist; and Arden Essenden, the fanatic of action, gave
point and definition to the differences of opinion.</p><p>They were interesting rather than outstanding men because the
general level of intelligence was a high one.  The gathering had a
personality of its own, wary, resolved to be well informed and to
weigh considerations, but essentially determined.  The presence of
that miscellany of delegations and commissions which besieged the
Conference dramatized the world situation and pressed for
decisions.  "I feel like one of those old world jurymen," wrote
Williams Kapek, "who used to be locked up together until they
returned a verdict.  And you cannot imagine how hot and dry Basra
can sometimes contrive to be."</p><p>De Windt and his school of writers had planned the framework of a
new world and shown to what social elements one had to look for its
evocation, but he had given only the most scanty suggestions for
getting rid of the body of the old.  Already in 1965 the Modern
State people had had a fairly distinct vision of our present order.
But few of them had anticipated the diffused toughness of the old
corpus and its capacity for counter–revolutionary exertion.  That
had become oppressively evident by 1975.</p><p>Reports on the general situation had been very carefully prepared.
They dealt with the various centres at which the spirit of
opposition was being organized.  Most serious of these were those
former sovereign governments and legal systems, which had seemed
effaced, moribund or prostrate during the desolation of the
Famished and Fever–stricken Fifties.  In 1965 the only government
actively antagonistic to the Controls had been the Soviet
government in Russia.  That antagonism, curiously enough, was not
so great as it had been at first.  The technicians of the
sovietized regions were ousting the politicians; there was now
indeed a working cooperation of Russian transport, communications
and production with the world system under the Controls, and there
seemed a reasonable prospect of ultimate assimilation.  There was
no objection being made to people nominally communists who were
also Fellows of the Modern State, and many Russian scientific and
technical workers were Modern State Fellows and not members of the
communist party at all.  The reports discussed hopefully and
analytically the possibility of some similar process in America and
the Far East.  There also the political and legal structures did
not present insurmountable obstacles to assimilation.  The decline
of humbug in America was bringing out the fundamental constructive
energy of that great synthesis of Western peoples.  But elsewhere
there was increasing evidence that the sovereign state system and
the system of private ownership were fundamentally irreconcilable
with the new conceptions.</p><p>The reports gave information, that was in many particulars new to
most of the assembled Fellows, of the very strenuous attempts that
were being made by the reviving national governments in Germany,
France, Italy and Great Britain to resume the manufacture of
aeroplanes and war material.  Whether there was a common agreement
among them was doubtful, but the intention to put up air forces and
organize aerodromes that should be able to ignore the regulations
and refuse the services of the Air and Sea Control was quite plain.
They were finding great difficulty in securing the services of
competent engineers, mechanics and aviators, but the thing was
going on.  Every student in the technical schools of the Control
who failed a test or an examination, or was penalized for
misbehaviour or rejected from the Modern State Fellowship, would
turn up presently as a national government expert.  And the
governments were now setting up their own national technical
schools and attempting to bring the schools and laboratories of the
Control into the "national" educational organization.  Not only was
there a disposition to set up a competing system side by side with
the Controls system, but there was a growing tendency to annex the
organizations, roads, plant, mines, factories, aerodromes, schools,
colleges, laboratories and personnel of the Control that chanced to
be within the jurisdiction of the sovereign government concerned.
The new Bavarian government, the Windsor Parliament and the
government in Rome were all "arranging to take over" these things
within their territories.  They were becoming more explicit about
it every year.  They persisted in regarding the interlocking
Controls as a dangerous international Trust.</p><p>This was the burthen of the national missions of observation and
enquiry which were stewing in the sunshine outside the doors of the
Conference—"in a state of tentative menace", as Williams Kapek put
it.</p><p>The minor delegations representing groups of owners and organized
local interests had this much in common with the national missions,
that they proposed more or less frankly to resume possession of
properties the Controls had taken hold of and revived, or to impose
burthensome charges.  They varied like the inmates of a zoological
garden in scale and power, but they had one quality in common: an
obstructive litigiousness.</p><p>In the frankness of its privacy behind its closed doors, the
Conference sized up these antagonisms and discussed their
treatment.  "There are just three lines of treatment possible,"
said Ryan brutally.  "We can treat with 'em, bribe 'em, or rule
'em.  I'm for a straight rule."</p><p>"Or combine those ingredients," said Hooper Hamilton.</p><p>The method of treaty–making and a modus vivendi was already in
operation in regard to Russia.  There indeed it was hard to say
whether the communist party or the Modern State movement was in
control, so far had assimilation gone.  And the new spirit in the
old United States was now so "Modern", that the protests of
Washington and of various state governors against the Controls were
received hilariously.  Aeroplanes from Dearborn circled over the
capital and White House and dropped parodies of the President's
instructions to dissolve the Air and Food Trust of America.  All
over that realist continent, indeed, the Controls expanded as a
self–owned business with a complete disregard of political
formalities.  But the European situation was more perplexing.</p><p>"Most of these European sovereign governments are no more than
scarecrows," said William Ryan.  "There's no living people behind
them any longer.  Leastway, no living people that matter.  Call
their bluff on them and you'll hear no more about them."</p><p>It was Shi–lung–tang who argued against defiance and stated the
case for Bribery.</p><p>Bribery in his suave exposition, bribery combined with treaties and
tact, became a highly moral amelioration of direct action.  He
asked the Conference to realize how specialized and rare as yet was
its new forward–looking habit of mind.  When all the work of the
propaganda and schools had been accounted for, it was doubtful if a
twentieth part of the race accepted, or if a tenth understood, even
in the most general terms, the difference between minds trained to
creative conceptions and minds brought up in an atmosphere of
defensive acquisitiveness and property accumulation.  It would take
three or four generations to convert the world to a forward–looking
attitude.  Either the Modern State movement had to seize power
openly now and inaugurate a tyranny that would have to last as long
as it took to turn round the great majority of intelligences into
the new direction, or it had to propitiate, compromise and persuade
these outer masses—UPON THEIR OWN LINES.</p><p>"These people will never see things as we see them," he insisted,
making strange gestures and repeating his words to emphasize their
importance.  "They have to live and die, ON THEIR OWN LINES.  It is
not just to impose too much upon them.  It is only as they die out
that the Modern State form of mind can hope to be in a dominant
majority.  Their mental vices are incurable.  Meet them half way,
make things easy for them.  You will save the world three
generations of suffering and bitter conflict."</p><p>He unfolded his Machiavellian project.  A greedy acquisitiveness
was part of the make–up of every energetic old world–type.  They
were as incurably voracious as dogs.  And yet we made good friends
and helpers out of dogs.  Their loyalties were at best gang
loyalties; they were none the less greedy because they did at times
hunt in packs.  But they had no fundamental instinctive hostility
to the Modern State.  It was only when the Modern State thwarted
their established habits of behaviour that they snarled at it and
began to fear it.  They could never make a solid front against the
Modern State.  They could always be played off against each other,
one against another; they could be neutralized.  The lesson of
Russia's harsh repression of her bourgeoisie and professional
classes in the Twenties and Thirties was a warning against the
miseries and social damage of too sudden and forcible an attempt to
change ideals of behaviour.  Let the Modern State go more softly
and more kindly.</p><p>He went on to detailed suggestions.  With Russia, Spain and
America, bribery need play but a minor rôle.  The ruling mentality
in these countries was now such that the present working agreements
would pass naturally into assimilation in a little while.
Elsewhere there was really no permanent harm in recognizing the old
claims to sovereign and proprietary rights, and securing such a
hold upon leading men that they would keep their hands off the
Modern State propaganda and schools and be content with handsome
subsidies from the Control services and industries.  It would be
cheaper than war.  "If they want a little war now and then among
themselves—"</p><p>In spite of Shi–lung–tang's smiling face, there was audible
disapproval at this point.</p><p>When he had done, his case for tact and insinuating corruption was
knocked to pieces by Rin Kay.  "If we were a Society of Moral
Supermen," he said, "we might venture to be as disingenuous as
this."  But Mr. Shi–lung–tang forgot that every Fellow in the
Modern State society had two enemies: the acquisitive man outside
and the acquisitive man within.  The point their Chinese friend
missed was the fact that it was much more natural to adopt the
behaviour patterns of the old world than to acquire those of the
Modern State.  The old dispositions were something that was; the
new dispositions were something that had to be made and sustained.
The inner life of a Modern State Fellow was a sustained effort to
be simple and serve simply.  That should take him all his time.  He
could not afford to be intricate and politic.  "We have a difficult
enough task before us just to do what we have to do, plainly and
honestly.  We cannot afford to say and do THIS and mean THAT."
William Ryan supported that with vigour, but Hooper Hamilton spoke
long and elaborately on the other side.  The spirit of the society
was plainly with Kay.</p><p>M. L. Tagore, an economic botanist, introduced a new line of
thought into the discussion, or rather he revived the line of
thought of nineteenth–century mystical liberalism.  He said he was
equally against bribery, insincere treaties or any use of force.
He was old–fashioned enough to be a democrat and a believer in the
innate wisdom of the unsophisticated man.  And also he believed in
the supreme value of truth and inaggressiveness.  We must not
outrage the sense of right in man, even if that meant the
abandonment of our immediate objectives.  We had to persuade him.
And we had no right to assume that he did not hold himself to be
right because his conception of conduct differed from ours.  Let
the Modern State society go on with the scientific organization of
the world, yes, and let us go on with the propaganda of its
doctrines in every land.  But let it not lift a hand to compel, not
even to resist evil.  He appealed to the missionary successes of
early Buddhism and Christianity as evidence of the practical
successfulness of spiritual urgency and physical passivity.  He
concluded in a glow of religious enthusiasm, that did not spare him
the contemptuous criticisms of the social psychologists who fell
upon him tooth and nail so soon as he had done.</p><p>These speeches, which are to be found in full in the Basra
Conference Reports, vols. 371 and 372, were the three salient types
of opinion in that gathering.  The immense majority were for the
active line, for frankness and rule.  A not inconsiderable
minority, however, wavered behind the leadership of Hooper
Hamilton.  They felt that there were elaborations and refinements
that did not find expression in the more aggressive speeches, that
the use of force could be tempered by tact and that lucidity
towards an objective was compatible with kindliness and concession.</p><p>In a number of speeches some of them tried to express this rather
elusive conception of compromise; some of them were not too skilful
as speakers, they went too far in the opposite direction, and on
the whole they tended to drive the movement towards a harder
assertiveness than it might otherwise have expressed.  The problems
of the Russian system and America were abundantly discussed.
Russia now was represented only by technicians and there was
abundant evidence that the repressive influence of the Og–pu had
waned.  Ivan Englehart was again a leading figure.  He assured the
Conference that there would be no trouble from Moscow.  "Russia,"
he said, "is ready to assimilate.  Is eager to assimilate."</p><p>Arden Essenden spoke late in the general discussion; he spoke with
a harsh enthusiasm and passionate faith; he carried all the younger
men and most of the older ones with him and he shaped the ultimate
decisions.</p><p>Some of his phrases are, as people used to say, "historical".  He
said, "The World–State is not a thing of the Future.  It is here
and now.  It has always been here and now, since ever men said they
had a common God above them, or talked, however timidly, of the
brotherhood of mankind.  The man who serves a particular state or a
particular ownership in despite of the human commonweal is a
Traitor.  Men who did that have always been Traitors and men who
tolerated them nursed treason in their hearts.  In the past the
World–State had been torn up among three–score–and–ten anarchies
and a countless myriad of proprietors and creditors, and the
socialists and cosmopolitans, the true heirs of the race, were
hunted like criminals and persecuted and killed.</p><p>"Now, through the utter failure of those robbers even to maintain
their own social order and keep at peace among themselves, the
world has fallen into our hands.  Power has deserted them, and we,
we here, have Power.  If we do not use it, if we do not use it to
the fullest, we are traitors in our turn.  Are we to tolerate even
a temporary revival of the old system?  In the name of reason, why?
If their brains have got into the wrong grooves—well, we can make
fresh brains.  Are we to connive with, and indulge this riffraff
that waits outside our doors?  Go out and look at them.  Look at
their insincere faces!  Look at their furtive hands.  Weigh what
they say.  Weigh the offers they will make you!"</p><p>To us to–day that seems platitudinous and over emphatic, but it
conveyed the sense of the Conference and it led directly to the
general decision with which its proceedings concluded.  The most
significant of these was the increase of the Police of the Air and
Sea Ways to a million men, and the apportionment of a greatly
increased amount of energy to the improvement of their equipment.
There was also to be a great intensification and speeding up of
Modern State education and propaganda.  Provision was also made for
the enlistment of auxiliary forces and services as they might be
needed for the preservation of order; these auxiliaries were to
renounce any allegiance except to the Transport or other Control
that might enlist them.  The Controls were reorganized, and a
central committee, which speedily became known as the World
Council, was appointed by them to act as the speaking head of the
whole system.  The ideas of treaties and contracts with exterior
administrations and of any diplomatic dealings with dissentients
were abandoned.  Instead it was determined that this central
committee, the World Council, should openly declare itself the sole
government of the world and proceed to make the associated Controls
the administrative organization of the planet.</p><p>Accordingly a proclamation was prepared to this effect and issued
very widely.  It was broadcast as well as printed and reprinted
from a multitude of centres.  It was "put upon the ether"
everywhere to the exclusion of other matter.  For now the world had
its wireless again in as great abundance already as in the early
Thirties.  So simultaneously the whole planet received it.  It
whipped up the awaiting miscellany at Basra into a foam of excited
enquiry.  All over the world city crowds or solitary workers
received it, open–mouthed.  At first there was very little
discussion.  The effect was too stunning for that.  People began to
talk after a day or so.</p><p>We give it as it was issued: a singularly poor piece of prose when
we consider the magnificence of its matter.  It seems to have been
drafted by Arden Essenden, with some assistance from Hamilton and
amended in a few particulars by the Council.</p><p>"The Council for World Affairs, constituted by the Air and Sea
Control and its associates, declares:</p><p>"That between 1950 and 1965 this planet became derelict through the
incapacity of its ostensible rulers and property owners to keep the
peace, regulate production and distribution, and conserve and guide
the common life of mankind;</p><p>"That chaos ensued, and</p><p>"That it became urgently necessary to build up a new world
administration amidst the ruins.</p><p>"This the Air and Sea Control did.</p><p>"This administration has now been organized about a Central Council
for World Affairs, which is making this statement to you.</p><p>"It is the only sovereign upon this planet.  There is now no other
primary authority from end to end of the earth.  All other
sovereignty and all proprietary rights whatever that do not conduce
directly to the general welfare of mankind ceased to exist during
the period of disorder, and cannot be revived.</p><p>"The Council has its air and sea ways, its airports, dockyards,
factories, mines, plantations, laboratories, colleges and schools
throughout the world.  These are administered by its officials and
protected by its own police, and the latter are instructed to
defend these organizations whenever and wherever it may be
necessary against the aggression of unauthorized persons.</p><p>"In every centre of population there are now Modern State nuclei
and Control agents conducting the educational work of the Council
and in reasonable contact with the local economic life, with local
enterprises, local authorities and individuals not yet affiliated
to the Modern State organization.  The time has come for all these
various quasi independent organs of business and administration to
place themselves in orderly relations to the new Government of the
Whole World.</p><p>"We are constituting a Bureau of Transition, for the simplification
and modernization of the business activities, the educational and
hygienic services, production, distribution and the preservation of
order and security throughout our one home and garden, our pleasure
ground and the source of all our riches—the earth, our Mother
Earth, our earth and yours.</p><p>"Without haste or injustice and without delay, with a due regard to
your comfort, your welfare and your wishes, the Bureau will set
itself to bring your life into sound and permanent correlation with
the one human commonweal."</p><p>"It is usurpation!" cried a voice, when the declaration was put to
the vote as a whole.</p><p>"You decide upon Force," said Shi–lung–tang.  "I did my best—"</p><p>"But this means War!" cried Tagore.</p><p>"No," said Arden Essenden.  "There is no more War.  This is not
War—nor Revolution.  This is the recognition of a Revolution and
Government again."</p></section><footer/></body></html>