<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>3: The Technical Revolutionary</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch03s02.xhtml" title="2: Thought and Action: The New Model of Revolution"/><link rel="next" href="ch03s04.xhtml" title="4: Prophets, Pioneers, Fanatics and Murdered Men"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="3: The Technical Revolutionary" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646905860"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">3: The Technical Revolutionary</h2></div></div></div><p>The existence of this large number of scientific and technical
workers in the Western communities and their rapid and lively
apprehension of the breakdown about them is one of the profoundest
differences between the second and the first Decline and Fall.</p><p>We find no real equivalent at all to them in the Roman story.
There were great numbers of artisans without any science, steeped
in tradition; and quite out of touch with these artisans there were
a few small groups of ineffective philosophers whose speculations
were finally swamped by the synthesis of Christianity.  Artisan and
philosopher were in different worlds.  The philosopher has left it
on record that he despised the artisan.  Probably the artisan
despised the philosopher in equal measure so far as he knew about
him; but he has not left it on record.  Neither artisan nor
philosopher seem to have had any awareness of the broad social
forces that were destroying the common security in which they went
about their affairs, and turning the Empire into a battling ground
for barbarian adventurers.</p><p>It is doubtful if at any time the imperial court or the imperial
civil service had any real conception of any sustained decline.
Nineteenth– and twentieth–Century historians, as Ogilvy and Freud
point out in their Roman History (2003 and revised by Pan Chow
Liang 2047), were all too apt to imagine an up–to–date intelligence
for such emperors as Julius Cæsar, Octavius, Marcus Aurelius or
Domitian.  They represented them as scheming and planning on almost
modern lines.  But there is no proof of any such awareness in the
Latin record.  One large element in that old Roman world that would
surely have displayed some sense of the needs of the time, if
anywhere there had been that sense, was the universally present
building industry.  It did hold on in a way throughout the decline
and fall, but consciously it did nothing politically.</p><p>Students are still working out the preservation and continuation of
the art and mystery of the masons into the middle ages.  There was
a great loss of knowledge but also a real survival.  The medieval
free–masons who built those flimsy but often quite beautiful Gothic
cathedrals it is now such a task to conserve, carried on a
tradition that had never really broken with that of the pyramid
builders.  But they had no sense of politics.  They had a tradition
of protective guild association similar to the Trade Unions of the
Capitalist age, they interfered in local affairs in order to make
jobs for themselves, but there is no sign that at any time they
concerned themselves with the order and stability of the community
as a whole.  Their horizons were below that level of intelligence.</p><p>Now the skilled and directive men of the collapsing order of the
twentieth century were of an altogether livelier quality.  Their
training was not traditional but progressive, far more progressive
than that of any other class.  They were inured to fundamental
changes in scope, method and material.  They ceased to be
acquiescent in the political and financial life about them directly
they found their activities seriously impeded.  Simultaneously with
the outbreak of that very expressive and significant word
"Technocracy" in the world's Press (1932–33) we find, for instance,
a Professor of Engineering, Professor Miles Walker, at a meeting of
the British Association for the Advancement of Science, boldly
arraigning the whole contemporary order by the standards of
engineering efficiency.  Everywhere in that decadence, amidst that
twilight of social order, engineers, industrialists and professors
of physical science were writing and talking constructive policies.
They were invading politics.  We have already noted the name of
Professor Soddy as one of the earlier men of science who ceased to
"mind his own business", and took up business psychology.</p><p>At first these technicians and business men were talking at large.
They did not immediately set about doing things; they still assumed
that the politicians and monetary authorities were specialists with
sound and thorough knowledge in their own departments, as capable
of invention and adaptation as themselves; so that they did no more
than clamour for decisive action—not realizing that the very
conditions under which bankers and politicians lived made them
incapable of varying their methods in any fundamental fashion.  But
this grew plain as disaster followed disaster.  A new type had to
assume authority if new methods were to be given a fair chance.
New methods of government must oust the old.  An increasing
proportion of the younger men, abandoning all ideas of loyalty to
or cooperation with the old administrative institutions, and with
an ever clearer consciousness of their objective, set themselves to
organize nuclei after the De Windt pattern and to link these up
with other nuclei.</p><p>The movement spread from workshop to workshop and from laboratory
to laboratory with increasing rapidity all over the world.  Al
Haran estimated that already in 1960 seven–eighths of the aviators
were Modern State men, and most of the others he says were "at
least infected with these same ideas".  Such infection went far and
deep.</p><p>Wherever there was little or no repression the development of this
movement to salvage civilization went on openly.  But to begin with
it encountered some very serious antagonisms.  The military element
had always been disposed to regard the man of science and the
technician as a gifted sort of inferior.  The soldier in his
panoply ordered them to do their tricks, and they did their tricks.
That was the idea.  The behaviour of both types during the World
War did much to confirm this assumption of their docility.
The Peace of Versailles came before there was any serious
disillusionment.  The nineteenth–century scientific man had been a
very lopsided man; often he had proved himself a poor conventional
snob outside his particular investigations.</p><p>"The sciences," as Simon Azar remarked, "came before Science"; the
scientific outlook was a late result and not a primary cause of the
systematic pursuit of knowledge.  It was a discovery and not a
starting point.  Science taught the men who served it, and the
pupil learnt more than the teacher knew.  There was and is an
incessant conflict in the scientific world between achievement and
fresh enquiry, and in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries
it was acute.  The older men suspected younger men with broader
ideas and hindered their advancement.  They wanted them all to work
in specialist blinkers.  But after the World War the world of pure
and applied science found itself obliged to think about things in
general, and, as the Great Slump went on without surcease, it
thought hard.  The technicians, because of their closer approach to
business and practical affairs generally, were considerably in
advance of the "pure" scientific investigators in this application
of constructive habits of thought to political and social
organization.</p><p>Even during the Chinese warfare there were intimations that
chemists, engineers and doctors might have different ideas from the
military.  After the Tokio sterilization fiasco, and still more so
after the failure of the eleventh gas offensive upon Wuchang to
produce adequate results, the Japanese military authorities began
to enquire into the possibility of "expert sabotage", and their
enquiries had a certain repercussion upon the relations of
"scientific" military men to real scientific and technical experts
in Europe.  There was an attempt to distinguish between experts who
were "loyal" and experts who were "subversive".  More often than
not it was the latter who were the brilliant and inventive men.
Uncritical loyalty was found to go with a certain general dullness.
The authorities found themselves in a dilemma between men who could
not do what was wanted of them and men who would not.</p><p>A campaign against pacificist, disturbing and revolutionary ideas
had been gathering force during the thirties.  It became a confused
and tiresome persecution in the later forties.  But it was
ineffective because it was incoherent.  Attempts to weed the staffs
and students of technical schools and to reduce the teaching
profession to docility failed, because there seemed to be no way of
distinguishing what was essential science from what was treasonable
thought.  The attempt to destroy freedom in one part of a man's
brain while leaving other parts to move freely and creatively was
doomed to failure from the outset.</p></section><footer/></body></html>