<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>4: Prophets, Pioneers, Fanatics and Murdered Men</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch03s03.xhtml" title="3: The Technical Revolutionary"/><link rel="next" href="ch03s05.xhtml" title="5: The First Conference at Basra: 1965"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="4: Prophets, Pioneers, Fanatics and Murdered Men" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646900020"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">4: Prophets, Pioneers, Fanatics and Murdered Men</h2></div></div></div><p>History, especially general history, is prone to deal too much with
masses and outlines.  We write that "all Germany" resented an
insult, or the "hopes of Asia" fell.  But the living facts of
history are changes in thought, emotion and reaction in the minds
of thousands of millions of lives.</p><p>In the preceding sections we have spoken in general terms of
"concepts of combination" developing; of ideologies dissolving and
giving place to other ideologies like clouds that gather and melt
and pass across the mental skies of mankind.  In the books before
those sections we traced the growing awareness of a possible World–
State in the thoughts of men throughout two thousand years of slow
awakening.  But the presentation is incomplete until we have turned
our attention, for a chapter at least, from the broad sweep of
opinion and the changing determination of the collective will, to
the texture of individual experiences, the brain storms, the
tormented granules, which shaped out these massive structural
developments.</p><p>One must draw upon the naive materials of one's own childhood to
conceive, however remotely, the states of mind of those rare
spirits who looked first towards human brotherhood.  One must
consider the life of some animal, one's dog, one's cheetah or one's
pony, to realize the bounded, definite existence of a human being
in the early civilizations.  The human life then was just as set in
its surroundings as any animal's.  There was the town, the river,
the cultivations, the distant hills, the temple, near friends and
strange distant enemies constituting a complete and satisfying ALL.
The gods were credible and responsible, taking all ultimate
responsibility off your shoulders; the animals had souls like
yourself, as understandable as yourself, and the darkness and
shadows were haunted by spirits.  In that sort of setting
innumerable generations lived and loved and hated and died.
Everything was made familiar and understandable by the trick of
personification.  You brought the stranger into your family; you
made it a member of your group.  Earth was a mother and the sun a
great father of glory marching across the sky.</p><p>It is a marvellous intricate history to trace how the human mind
began to doubt, to pry and question, to penetrate the curtains of
assurance and fancied security that enclosed it.  Perhaps it was
rather torn out of its confidence than that it fretted its way out
by any urgency of its own.</p><p>The Hebrew Bible, which Christianity preserved for us, is a
precious record of uneasy souls amidst the limited conditions of
these ages before mechanism or travel or logical analysis.  It
tells how man came out of the Eden of unquestioning acceptance and
found perplexity.  It gives us intimate glimpses of states of mind
that were typical of what went on in hundreds of thousands of
struggling brains.  They were beginning to note thorns and weeds,
toil and the insecurity of life.  They made great efforts to
explain their growing sense that all was not right with the
world.  They had to dramatize the story.  They had as yet only
"personification" as a means of apprehending relations and causes.
They had no way of getting hold of a general idea except by
imagining it as a person.  Strange thoughts frightened them.  They
seemed exterior to them.  They dared not even say "I think"; they
had to say "I heard a voice" or the "Word of the Lord came to me".
Enormous effort therefore was needed to pass from the thought of a
patriarchal tribal God to a mightier overriding God.  Men did not
unite communities; they identified their Gods.  Monotheism was the
first form of the World–State in men's minds.</p><p>What a desperate deed it was for some inwardly terrified man to
lift up his voice against the local elders and the local idol,
proclaiming "There is no God but God."  The reactions of his
fellows, living still within the framework of accepted beliefs, to
this attempt to break out to wide relations, were scorn, amusement,
irritation, dislike or horror and superstitious fear.  We have the
story of Mohammed recorded, and of his fight with the gods of
Mecca, but that was a late and sophisticated instance of something
that happened in innumerable times and places; the challenge of the
man "inspired" by his new idea to the social mental nest out of
which he was breaking.</p><p>Men who saw the light and spoke, were only one species of a larger
genus of human beings whose minds worked differently from the
common man's or were simply more feverishly active.  The others
were eccentrics or downright madmen.  One sort was hardly to be
told from another, for both were sayers of incredible things.</p><p>The beginning of written record in the millennium before Christ
shows a long tradition already established for the treatment of
these odd, disturbing exceptions.  So far as we can peer into the
past we find the tranquillity of the everyday community broken by
these troubled troublesome individuals who went about, living
queerly, saying unusual and disconcerting things, inciting people
to behave strangely, threatening divine anger, foreboding evils.
There was a disposition to buy them off with a sort of reverence—
and disregard.  Inferior and unhappy people might find an interest
and excitement in their strange announcements and suggestions.  But
rulers did not like them, comfortable people disliked and feared
them.  They irritated, they terrified contented people.  They
seemed perverse, and many of them plainly were perverse.  If they
went too far mankind turned on them and they were ill–treated and
mobbed and ridiculed; they were cast into prisons; beaten and
killed.</p><p>The ones that mattered most seemed always, by our present
standards, to have had something to say that was at once profoundly
important and yet not quite true or not quite truly said.
Disciples, sometimes in great multitude, respond to their
enigmatical utterances.  When they died or were killed men were
left asking, "What exactly did he say?  What exactly did he mean?"
The inspired words became very readily riddles for interpreters and
matter for pedantry.  They were phrased and rephrased, applied and
misapplied, tried out in every possible and impossible way.</p><p>Nowadays we find a common quality in all these madmen, prophets,
teachers and disturbers of the mental peace.  The species was
learning to talk and use language.  The race was, as it were,
trying to think something out; was attempting to say something new
and enlarging to itself.  It was doing this against great
resistance.  Its intellectual enterprise was playing against its
instinctive fear of novelty.  Some of these teachers died terribly,
were flayed or burnt or tortured to death.  One hung on a cross and
died of physical weakness some hours before the two felons who were
his hardier fellow sufferers, leaving a teaching compounded of such
sweet and fine ideas of conduct, such mystical incomprehensibleness,
such misleading inconsistency, that it remained a moral stimulus and
an intellectual perplexity, a jungle for heresies and discoveries,
for millions of souls for two millennia.</p><p>Vainly does one try nowadays to put ourself into the mind of the
prophet led to execution.  We know the value of what he did, it is
true, but what did he think he was doing?  The secret of such
personifying, urgently seeking brains seems hidden from us now for
ever.</p><p>In the busier and more prosperous social phases of history such
disturbers are less evident; in times of change, and especially
when there was also a release of social energy, when conflicting
traditions ground and wore upon each other, these troubled and
troublesome minds seemed to have multiplied.  The days of the vast
unstable Roman imperialism abounded in efforts to say something new
and profound about life.  Everywhere there were new worships,
because a worship still seemed the only form in which a new idea
and way of life could be conveyed from mind to mind.  Everywhere
the puzzled sprawling human race was trying to say something, some
magic word to resolve its perplexities and guide it to peace.</p><p>With the Renascence of learning and the onset of organized science
the actual number and the actual proportion of enquiring and
innovating minds increased greatly.  The effort of the racial
mind to master the conditions of its being was renewed on a
multitudinous scale.  But now the disturbers of equanimity no
longer appear as wild–eyed prophets; they no longer claim that the
Word of the Lord is upon them.  Abstract and logical thought has
pervaded the mind of the race and such personification is no longer
needed.  They do not denounce the old gods; they analyse them.
Moreover, now that we approach modern times and deal with more and
more abundantly recorded events, we begin to realize with a living
understanding and sympathy what was going on in the minds of the
innovators and to feel in touch with the immeasurable heroisms and
innumerable tragedies of those later pioneers, those rebels,
critics, revolutionaries who were thrusting, more or less
intelligently, against the acceptances and inertias amidst which
they lived, towards a saner, more comprehensive and more clearly
apprehended racial idea.</p><p>So far no completely masterly digest has been made of the millions
of biographies and tons of other material that tell of the mental
seething of the world from the seventeenth century of the Christian
Era onward.  If the old world prophets are too rare and remote for
our understanding, the modern revolutionaries are almost too close
and abundant for us to stand back and see them clearly.  Vast
studies have been organized of various portions of the field; Roger
Cuddington and his associates' Studies of Protestant Thought in
Holland, the Rhineland, Switzerland and Britain from the
Seventeenth to the Nineteenth Century give, for instance, a picture
of one wide area and period, in which the fermentation arose first
in a religious form and owed much to the clash of Jew and Gentile;
while Margrim's Early Forms of Anarchism and Socialism is a very
successful attempt to realize the ideas and personalities from
which the modern criticism of rule and property derived.  With the
help of such works as these, and with some luck among the
biographies, we do contrive at last to get down close to an
imaginative participation in those individual reactions, which in
the aggregate remade the human community in the form we know to–
day.</p><p>Every one of these personal stories, if it were told completely,
would have to begin with a child, taking the world for granted,
believing its home, its daddy and mummy to be right and eternal.
It confronted a fixed and established world with no standard of
comparison in past or future.  It was told its place in life and
what it had to do.  Bad luck, discomfort, some shock or some innate
unrest was needed to put a note of interrogation against these
certainties.  Then for those whom destiny has marked for
disturbance comes the suspicion:  "This that they have told me
isn't true."  Still more disturbing came the possibility:  "This
that they do and want me to do isn't right."  And then with a
widening reference:  "Things could be better than this."  So the
infected individual drifted out of easy vulgar living with his
fellows, out of a natural animal–like acceptance of the established
thing, to join the fermenting and increasing minority of troubled
minds that made trouble.</p><p>He began talking to his fellows or he made notes in secret of his
opinions.  He asked awkward questions.  He attempted little
comments and ironies.  We could conjure up hundreds of thousands of
pictures of such doubters beginning to air their opinions in the
eighteenth–century world, in the little workshops of the time, in
shabby, needy homes, in market places, in village inns, daring to
say something, hardly daring to say anything, unable often to join
up the vague objections they were making into any orderly
criticism.  But in the brown libraries and studies of the period
other men were sitting, poring over books, writing with something
furtive in their manner, while the pride of contemporary life
brayed and trumpeted along the roadway outside.  "What is being
told to the people is not true.  Things could be better than this."
Men ventured on strange suggestions in university classes; brought
out startlingly unorthodox theses.</p><p>The infectious interrogations spread.  Constituted authority got
wind of these questionings and itself came questioning in search of
heresy and sedition, with rack and thumbscrew.  When we read the
books and pamphlets of that awakening phase, writings which seem
amidst profuse apologies to half say next to nothing, we get the
measure of the reasonable timidities of the time.  Men might pay in
sweating agony and death for that next–to–nothing they had said.</p><p>At first they raised not so much the substance as the form of an
interrogation.  In the sixteenth century you would have found a
number of local accumulations of heresies, but hardly any inkling
of the Modern State.  Except for some scholar's echo to the
Republic or Laws of Plato, there was no one at all reading and
comparing in the field of social and political structure before the
seventeenth century.  The eighteenth century was, in comparison
with its predecessor, an age of voluminous revolutionary thought.
Men began calling fundamental ideas and political institutions in
question as they had never been challenged since the onset of
Christianity.  They went into exile for their innovations; their
books were burnt; censorships were established to suppress these
new ideas.  Still they spread and multiplied.  The authoritative
claim of aristocracy, the divinity of monarchy, tarnished,
dwindled, became ineffective under these dripping notes of
interrogation.  Republics appeared and the first embryonic
intimations of socialism.</p><p>In our account of the first French Revolution and the revolutionary
perturbation of the eighteenth century [No traces of this account
are to be found in Raven's papers.—Ed.] we have had to
discriminate between the economic and social forces that were
forcing political readjustment on the one hand, and the influence
of new ideas on the other.  We have shown how little these formal
changes were planned, and how small a share in these events is to
be ascribed to creative intention or mental processes generally.
Nevertheless the questioning was drawing closer to reality and the
scope of the planning was spreading.  We will not tell again of the
profound change in men's ideas about private property, private
freedom and monetary relationship, that began to find expression in
the socialist and communist movements of the age.  Our concern here
is to emphasize the billions of small wrangles that were altering
the collective thought, to summon out of the past, for an instant,
an elfin clamour of now silenced voices that prepared the soil for
revolution, the not–at–all–lucid propagandists at street corners,
the speakers in little meeting–houses, in open spaces and during
work intermissions; to recall the rustle of queer newspapers that
were not quite ordinary newspapers; and the handicapped book
publications that were everywhere fighting traditional and
instinctive resistances.  Everywhere the leaven of the Modern State
was working—confusedly.</p><p>As we have seen, the new conception of a single world society did
not come at one blow, perfect and effective, into the human mind.
It was not completed even in outline until the days of De Windt,
and before that time it was represented by a necessary confusion of
contributory material, incomplete bits of it and illogical and
misleading extensions of those bits.  It had to begin like that; it
had to begin in fragments and rashly.  There was always a fierce
disposition manifested to apply the new incomplete ideas, headlong
and violently.  The more the sense of insufficiency gnaws at a
man's secret consciousness, the more he is in conflict with an
inner as well as an outer antagonist, the more emphatic, dogmatic
and final he is apt to be.  That disposition to bring the new ideas
to the test of reality, the urge to assert by experiment, was the
chief source of trouble for these ever increasing multitudes, of
innovating minds.  Constituted authority, established usage, have
no quarrel with ideas as such; it is only when these ideas become
incitation, when they sought incarnation in act and reality, that
conflict began.</p><p>So all over the world throughout the nineteenth century men were to
be found contriving trouble for authority and devising outrages on
usage.  The light of world reconstruction lit their souls, but
often it filtered through thick veils of misconception and had the
colourings of some epidemic hate.  They dreamt of insurrections, of
seizures of power, of organized terror; in practice their efforts
dwindled down too often to stupid little murders—often completely
irrelevant murders—to shouting and swarming in the streets, to
peltings and window–breaking, to blowing in the front doors of
government houses and embassies, to the casting of explosives
amidst the harmless spectators at public ceremonies.</p><p>Before the French Revolution there was not nearly so much of such
sporadic violence as afterwards.  There were a few assassinations
by religious or racial fanatics, but usually the older type of
political crime was definitely connected with some conspiracy to
change the personnel rather than the nature of a régime.  The
"Anarchist" outrages of the nineteenth century, however clumsy,
were by comparison social criticisms.  Behind them, even though
vague, exaggerated and distorted, was the hope of a new world
order.</p><p>Linked inseparably with all these premature expressions of the
desire for a new life were the activities of more extensive
revolutionary systems: printing–presses in cellars, furtive
distribution of papers, secret meetings, the savage discipline of
fear–ruled illegal societies, the going to and fro of emissaries—
men often with narrow and ill–assorted minds, but nevertheless men
with everything to lose and little to gain or hope for by such
activities.  After we have allowed for every sort of resentment and
bitter impulse in them, the fact remains such men were devotees.
They were a necessary ferment for the spread of thought.</p><p>That increasing revolutionary ferment, in all its tentative
aspects, used to be called The Extreme Left.  There had never been
anything quite like it in the world before.  For the most part
these men had broken not only with the political and social order
of their time, but with its religious beliefs.  Between 1788 and
1965, hundreds of thousands of men and thousands of women, far
braver than any Moslem fanatics, sustained by no hope of a future
life, no hope of any greeting after the sudden blankness of their
untimely deaths, and, so far as we can gather now, not even with a
clear vision of the full and ordered social life for which they
died, stood up sullenly or with a certain sad exaltation to face
the firing party or the halter.  A hundred times as many endured
exile, prisons, ostracisms, beatings, gross humiliations and the
direst poverty for the still dimly apprehended cause of human
liberation.</p><p>They had not even the assurance of unanimity.  They were all
convinced that there had to be a better world, but they had not
the knowledge, they had not the facilities for free and open
discussion, to clear up and work out the inevitable outline of
their common need.  They formulated their ideas dully and clumsily;
they went a certain way to truth and then stopped short; they
suspected all other formulæ than the ones they themselves had hit
upon; they quarrelled endlessly, bitterly, murderously, among
themselves.  Nearly all sooner or later were infected by hate.
Often it happened that two men, each of whom had roughly half the
justice of things in him, killed each other, when indeed they
needed only to put their prepossessions together to get the full
outline of a working reconstruction.</p><p>Da Silva has called all those who made the revolutions and
revolutionary efforts that occurred between 1788 and 1948 the
"revolutionaries of the half–light".  His studies of the tangled
history of the new social concepts that broke through to open
popular discussion, only after the establishment of the Soviet
régime in Russia in 1917, constitute a very brilliant work of
elucidation and simplification.  It is a history of twilight that
ends at dawn.  In the twenties and thirties of the twentieth
century the ordinary man in the street was discussing, cheaply
perhaps, but freely, ideas, possibilities and courses of action
that no one would have dared to whisper about, would scarcely have
dared to think about, two centuries before.  He scarcely knew a
single name of the pioneers, fanatics and desperadoes who had won
this freedom for his mind.</p><p>The nature of the conflict was changing.  That was very plain by
1940.  Where there had been pioneers, there were now systematic
explorers and surveyors; the teeming multitudes of our race were
still producing devoted and sacrificial types, but the half light
was now a cloudy daylight and the ordered analyses and plans of
such men as De Windt were making understandings and cooperations
possible that would have been incredible in the nineteenth century.
In the nineteenth century revolution was suspected, forbidden,
dark, criminal, desperate and hysterical.  In the twentieth century
it became candid and sympathetic.  The difference was essentially
an intellectual one; after a vast period of stormy disputation the
revolutionary idea had cleared up.  The sun of the Modern State
broke through.</p><p>Revolution still demanded its martyrs, but the martyrdoms were
henceforth of a different character.  Biographies of revolutionists
before the Great War go on by night, amidst a scenery of back
streets, cellars, prisons, suspicions and betrayals.  Biographies
of revolutionists in the final struggle to establish the Modern
State go on in full daylight.  It is reaction now which has taken
to the darkness, to plots, assassinations, and illegal measures.
The Modern State propagandist became less and less like an
insurgent individual of some alien subject race; he became more and
more like a missionary in savage country, ill–armed or unarmed, and
at an immediate disadvantage, but with the remote incalculable
prestige of a coming power behind him.</p><p>The later death–roll of revolutionaries has fewer and fewer
executions in it and an increasing tale of assassinations and
deaths in public conflict.  A larger and larger proportion of those
who died for it were killed either by mobs or in fair and open
fighting.  And soon the idea of the Modern State had become so
pervasive that the battles ceased to be for it or against it; they
became, rather, misunderstandings between impatient zealots with a
common end.  In many conflicts the historian is still perplexed to
determine which side, if either, can be counted as fighting for the
Modern State.</p><p>The analyses of De Windt made immense charities of understanding
possible.  Creative–minded men, though they hardened against the
liar and the cheat, became less and less willing to fight the
puerile adherent and the honest fanatic with a tiresome but
honestly intended formula.  "There," they said, "but for certain
misconceptions and resolvable obsessions go our men," and set
themselves at any risk or loss to the task of conversion.  Just as
Fascism in its time seized upon the ancient terroristic and
blackmailing Mafia in Sicily and partly annexed it, partly changed
it and so superseded it, just as the Nazi movement incorporated
large chunks of the Communist party in its efforts to reformulate
Germany, so now the Modern State fellowship grappled with the
world–wide series of organizations which had superseded democratic
institutions nearly everywhere, made every effort to capture the
imaginations of their adherents, and showed the most unscrupulous
boldness in seizing their direction whenever it could.  The Modern
State Movement differed from every preceding revolutionary movement
in its immense assimilating power, due to the clearness of the
objectives it set before men's minds.</p><p>The difference between the revolutionary before the Great War and
the revolutionary after that illuminating crisis is closely
parallel to the difference between the old alchemist and the modern
man of science; the former haunted by demons, goblins and spirits,
warped by symbolic obsessions and cabalistic words and numbers,
terribly alone with himself, obsessed with religious fears, by fear
of the inquisitor, by fear of the ruler above and of the rabble
below, perpetually baffled in his attempts to achieve great things,
but full of a dangerous unpremeditated knowledge of poisons and
mischievous devices; the latter with a mind released by centuries
of analysis and simplification, reassured by the incessant tale
of scientific victories, stoically indifferent to popular
misrepresentation and equally sure of his universe and himself.</p></section><footer/></body></html>