<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>2: Thought and Action: The New Model of Revolution</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch03s01.xhtml" title="1: The Plan of the Modern State is Worked Out"/><link rel="next" href="ch03s03.xhtml" title="3: The Technical Revolutionary"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="2: Thought and Action: The New Model of Revolution" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268646889500"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">2: Thought and Action: The New Model of Revolution</h2></div></div></div><p>It is a wholesome check upon individual pride that no single man
and indeed no single type of man is able both to conceive and carry
through the simplest of our social operations.  Even the man who
cultivates the earth and grows food cannot make the productive
implements he uses or select the seeds and plants that yield him
increase.  Defoe's queer story of Robinson Crusoe is an impossibly
hopeful estimate of what a single man, with only a little flotsam
and jetsam from the outer world, and in unusually benign climatic
conditions, on a desert island could contrive to do for his own
comfort and security.  Still more does this interdependence of men
and different types apply to the complex processes that now, in
this Age of Maximum Insecurity, were demanded, if the new
generation was to escape from the economic and institutional
wreckage amidst which it found itself, and create the social order
in which we live to–day.</p><p>First came the intellectuals, men living aloof from responsibility,
men often devoid of the qualities of leadership and practical
organization.  Like De Windt they planned everything and achieved
no more than a plan.  Such men are primarily necessary in the human
adventure, because they build up a sound diagnosis of events; they
reveal more and more clearly and imperatively the course that lies
before the race and in that task their lives are spent and
justified.  Then it is that the intelligent executive type, capable
of concentration upon a complex idea once it is grasped, and
resisting discursiveness as a drag on efficiency, comes into
action.  Their imaginative limitation is a necessary virtue for
the task they have to do.  No man can administer a province
successfully if he is always wandering beyond its frontiers.  The
rather unimaginative forcible type is the necessary executive of a
revolution, and the benefit of the revolution is entirely dependent
upon the soundness of the ideology with which he has been loaded.</p><p>Because of this necessity for complementary types of revolutionary,
history does not produce any modern equivalents to the legendary
figures of Solon, Moses or Confucius in its story of the coming of
the Modern State.  De Windt was not so much a creator as a
summarizer, a concentrator, a lens that gathered to a burning focus
the accumulating mental illumination of his day.</p><p>The light of understanding that lit the fires of this last
revolution came from no single brain.  It came from ten thousand
active and devoted minds, acting and reacting upon one another,
without order or precedence; it was like the growth of physical and
biological science that preceded it, something that happened as a
whole, something that happened not in any single consciousness but
in the consciousness of the race.</p><p>We have already noted how far back the first germination of the
World–State idea can be traced; we have shown how the forces of
economic life drove towards it in the nineteenth century.  We have
displayed it working as a quasi–instinctive aspiration in the
brains of Henry Ford and Woodrow Wilson.  With De Windt's Social
Nucleation we see it made concrete, with all its essential
structures projected and all its necessary conditions laid down, a
practicable proposal.  The World–State has ceased to be a cloudy
aspiration and it has become a plan.  Forceful men could adopt it.</p><p>A distinct change in the quality of those who were promoting the
movement for the Modern State became very evident even before the
War Cycle of the Forties.  It was now sufficiently "thought out"
for men of resolute character to incorporate it in their personal
lives.  It was passing over from the reflective to the energetic
types.  Its earliest propagandists had been largely reflective and
practically ineffective individuals; a miscellany of pacificists
whose dread and detestation of war was overwhelming and who had
the intelligence to realize that war can only be avoided by
establishing a World Pax; a number of writers, "pure" scientific
workers, young sociologists, economists and the like and
"intellectuals" from the working class movement.  Now a multitude
of engineers, architects, skilled foremen and industrial
organizers, technicians of all sorts, business men and captains of
industry, were also beginning to "talk Modern State" and put in an
increasing proportion of their time and attention to its advocacy.</p><p>The transition is easily explicable.  The increasing social
disorder was driving men of the vigorous practical type out of
satisfactory employment.  During the First Age of Prosperity, and
during the false recovery after the World War, such men had been
able to find ample work agreeable to their temperaments in the
immense industrial developments of the time.  They had organized
great businesses, vast production; they had exploited the incessant
stream of inventions; they had opened up the natural resources of
hitherto backward regions.  They had carried production far beyond
the consuming power of human society.  So long as all this
enterprise could go on, it did not seem necessary to them to
trouble about the political and monetary methods of their world.
Now and then some of them showed a certain restiveness at the
banking network; our typical original–minded industrial Henry Ford,
for instance, had two vigorous tussles with the bankers during his
career; but generally the phenomena of political and financial
strangulation only began to compel their serious attention after
the great Hoover Slump (the Thirty Year Slump) was well under way.</p><p>Then they began to think, talk and write about the social order
with the energy of men accustomed to handle large affairs and work
for immediate tangible results.  The vast experiment of Soviet
Russia aroused their technical jealousy and a sort of envious
impatience both at its opportunities and its incapacities.  And the
young men coming on from the abundant technical schools of the
time, stirred by the books and talk and omnipresent hopes and
memories of the immediate past, and looking for adventure and
achievement in material enterprise, realized very rapidly that the
lights of opportunity upon their paths were being turned down in a
manner at once mysterious and exasperating.</p><p>The revolutionary movement in the nineteenth century had seemed to
such men a tiresomeness of slacking workers, aided and abetted by
critics like Ruskin, artists like William Morris, playwrights like
Bernard Shaw and suchlike impracticable and unconvincing people.
It was associated in their minds with sham Gothic, yellow–green
draperies, long hair, anti–vivisection and vegetarianism.  There
was scarcely a man of scientific or technical eminence on the
revolutionary side before 1900.  But by the third decade of the
twentieth century two–thirds of the technicians, scientific workers
and able business organizers were talking active revolution.  It
was no longer to be a class insurrection of hands; it was to be a
revolt of the competent.  Their minds were feeling round for ideas.
They found in such books as De Windt's exactly what they wanted.
They began to set about the evocation of the Modern World–State in
no uncertain fashion.</p><p>A revolution in revolutionary ideas had occurred.  The protean
spirit of Revolution had cut its hair, put on blue overalls, made
blue prints for itself, created a New Model, and settled down to
work in a systematic fashion.</p></section><footer/></body></html>