<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>6: Æsthetic Frustration: The Note Books of Ariston Theotocopulos</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch04s05.xhtml" title="5: The Text Resumes: The Tyranny of the Second Council"/><link rel="next" href="ch04s07.xhtml" title="7: The Declaration of Mégève"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="6: Æsthetic Frustration: The Note Books of Ariston Theotocopulos" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268641290860"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">6: Æsthetic Frustration: The Note Books of Ariston Theotocopulos</h2></div></div></div><p>It is a growing custom of historians, and we have already followed
it freely, to vivify their general statements by quotations from
contemporary descriptive writers.  As histories have disentangled
themselves from their primitive obsession about rulers and their
policies, they have made a more and more extensive use of private
memoirs, diaries, novels, plays, letters, sketches, pictures and
the like.  Once upon a time washing bills and memorandum books were
below the "dignity of history".  Now we esteem them far above acts
of parliament or diplomatic memoranda.  And certainly there is no
more convenient source of information about current ideas and
feeling under the Air Dictatorship than the cipher Note Books of
that gifted painter and designer Ariston Theotocopulos (1997–2062).
For thirty–seven years until his death, he wrote in these books
almost daily, making his own shrewd comments on current events,
describing many odd and curious occurrences, noting very
particularly his own emotional reactions, and adorning them all
with a wealth of sketches, dreams, caricatures and the like, which
make the full edition in facsimile, with a translation, among the
greatest delights of the book–lover.  The bulk of this matter does
not concern the student of general history at all, and yet it is
possible to pick out from it material for a far clearer realization
of life under the second Council than could be derived from a score
of abstract descriptions.</p><p>The earlier of these volumes are coloured by the irritation of the
writer with three particular things: the restrictions upon private
flying, his difficulties in finding scope for his genius, and the
general want of beauty and graciousness in life.  At that time
there were no privately owned aeroplanes and no one could act as
an air pilot who was not an active Fellow of the Modern State
organization and subject to its rules and disciplines.  Theotocopulos
had an anarchistic soul, and his desire to wander freely above the
mountains and clouds, to go whither he liked at his own sweet will,
unhampered by any thought of immediate "service", became an
obsession with him.  "If they would let me alone I would give the
world something," he scribbles.  "But what on earth is the good of
those blighted old Master Decorators telling me to do this and
that?  Did I come into the world to imitate and repeat things done
already?"</p><p>And in another place he notes:  "Some damned official flying
overhead on his way to preventing something.  It spoilt the day for
me.  I couldn't THINK any more."</p><p>Then comes a cry of agony.  "The lay–out of all this terracing is
wrong.  What is the good of putting me to do a frieze of elephants
on a wall that ought to come down again?  If I do anything good
that wall will stay where it is.  The better I do it, the more
likely they are to keep that wall.  And it's wrong.  It's wrong.
It's wrong."</p><p>A few pages on, one word is all alone by itself:  "ELEPHANTS!"</p><p>Then follows a string of caricatures of that animal which Li has
characterized as acute biological criticism.  Theotocopulos had
been vividly interested in elephants, but now he had tired of them.
He represents them as diaphanous or altogether transparent, and
reveals the distresses of their internal lives.  And there is a
whole page of incredibly wicked elephants' eyes.</p><p>He was working on the rather deliberate decoration of the main–road
system then in course of construction, running from Cape Finisterre
through North Italy and along the North Black–Sea Dyke to the
Crimea and Caucasia.  That system has since been deflected from the
Ligurian coast northward, but at that time it was made to follow by
the sea to Genoa, and thence passed in a great cutting through the
mountains to the plain of the Po and so to the still existing
Chioggia viaduct.  It was one of a not very ably conceived system
of world roads that was greatly modified before its completion in
our own time, and it was carried out with a massiveness and a
solidity of ornamentation that witness to the World Council's
incapacity to realize that Change was still going on.  Those roads
seem to have been planned for all time.  They indicate mental
coagulation.</p><p>Theotocopulos was engaged upon the coast section between the old
town of Nice to the old port of Genoa.  It was driven in a series
of flattened curves that straightened out in places to a right
line, cutting brutally through headlands and leaping gulfs and bays
in vast viaducts.  Above and below the slopes were terraced with
natural or imitation marble walls and the terraces were planted
with oranges, lemons, vines, roses, olives and agaves.  These
terraces went up, as Theotocopulos says, "relentlessly" to the old
Corniche Road above, broken only by a few masses of evergreen
trees.  The ruins of the villas and gardens of the Capitalist era
and most of the towns along the coast that Titus Cobbett had
visited and described seventy–odd years before had now been cleared
away; a few groups of residential buildings occurred here and
there, and pretentious staircases, which were rarely used because
of the lifts they masked, led down to beaches and holiday places
and harbours for pleasure boats and fishermen.  These holiday
places and the residential buildings were low and solid–looking,
after the fashion of the time, and they provoked Theotocopulos to
frenzy.  He caricatured them and spotted his drawings with indecent
words.  It is amazing how truthfully he drew them and how
ingeniously he distorted them.  He represented them as cowering
into the earth like the late buildings of the war years, from which
they certainly derived their squatness.</p><p>"We still dream of air raids and war in the air," he said, and he
speaks elsewhere of "the inmates of those fortifications….  If
only I could get hold of an aeroplane and a bomb!  Perhaps after
all there is some sense in keeping intelligent people like me out
of the air, with this sort of stuff about."</p><p>His task unhappily kept him in close contact with all this squat
architectural magnificence.  He had won distinction at an unusually
early age for his brilliant drawings of men and animals; he had a
grotesque facility for seeing into bodies and conveying his sense
of internal activities; before his time the only anatomy known to
artists had been muscular anatomy; and he was set to "decorate" an
ungainly stretch of wall near Alassio with a frieze of elephants.
It is necessary to explain that in those days there was the
completest divorce in people's minds between æsthetic and
mechanical considerations.  First you made a thing, they thought,
and then you decorated it.  It seems almost incredible now, but the
engineers of the Air Dictatorship were supposed and expected to
disregard all thought of beauty in what they did.  If they made
something frightful, then the artist was called in to sugar the
pill.  There, as in so many things, the restless sensitive mind of
Theotocopulos anticipated the ideas of to–day.  "Engineers ought to
be artists," he says, "anyhow; and artists ought to be engineers or
leave structural work alone."  This wall of his still exists; his
decoration has preserved it, even as he foresaw.  It just remains
for his sake, a lesson for students and a monument to his still
incomparable talent.</p><p>"Took a holiday," he notes one day, "and rowed about five miles out
to sea.  These disproportions grow worse as one gets away from
them.  Never before have I seen anything that got uglier as it
receded in perspective.  This coast does.  The road is too broad
and big.  There will never be that much traffic.  The population of
the world isn't increasing and on the whole it rushes about less
than it did.  One hundred and twelve metres of width!  What is this
coming torrent of traffic from Finisterre to God knows where?  Not
a sign of it as yet.  Nor ever will be.  The little lizards get
lost across that glassy surface and die and dry up.  Artless
earthworms crawl out upon it and perish.  One sees them by the
thousand after wet weather.  No shade for miles.  The terraces are
badly spaced and the walls that sustain them look gaunt.  There is
no sympathy in all this straight stuff with the line and movement
of the hills behind.  They LIVE.  And this accursed habit of
building houses close to the ground!  Damn it, don't we build to
get away from the ground?"</p><p>And then suddenly in big capitals comes one word:  "PROPORTION!"</p><p>After that he meditated with his pencil in hand, jotting down his
thoughts.  "The clue to life.  Not simply beauty.  There is no evil
but WANT OF PROPORTION.  Pain?  Pain arises out of a disproportion
between sensations.  Dishonesty?  Cruelty?  It is all want of
proportion between impulse and control…."</p><p>It is interesting to trace in the notebooks how he tries over ideas
that are now familiar to everyone.  He worries between the ideas of
proportion and harmony.  Then he hits on the discovery that all
history is a record of fluctuations in proportion.  To–day, of
course, that is a commonplace.  We have told the economic and
political history of the twentieth century, for instance, almost
entirely as the story of an irregular growth of the elements of
life, hypertrophy of economic material going on concurrently with a
relative arrest of educational, legal, and political adjustment.
The first dim realizations of these disharmonies were manifested by
the appearance of "planning", those various crude attempts to make
estimates of quantities in social life of which the Russian Five
Year Plan was the first.  After 1930, the world was full of Plans,
and most of them were amazingly weak and headlong plans.</p><p>We learn from these notebooks of Theotocopulos how imperfectly this
idea of really deliberate quantitative preparation in the
activities of our species was apprehended even in the early twenty–
first century.  Just as the war complex ran away with men's minds
in the war period, so now political unity and uniformity and an
extravagant concentration of enterprise upon productive efficiency
had outrun reason.  The interest of these notebooks lies exactly in
the fact that they are not the writings of a scientific social
psychologist, but of a man who was, except for his peculiar genius
and energy of expression, a very ordinary personality.  They tell
us how common people were taking the peculiar drive of the times,
how the general mind was puzzling out its new set of perplexities
and asking why after having abolished war, restored order, secured
plenty, defeated the fears and realized the wildest hopes of the
martyr generations, it was still so far from tranquillity and
happiness.</p><p>"Growing pains," he writes abruptly.  "That was old Lenin's phrase.
Is a certain want of proportion unavoidable?"</p><p>After that flash in the pan, the notebook wanders off into a
dissertation upon Levels of Love, of no importance for our present
purpose.  But that idea of "Growing Pains" was working under the
surface all the time.  Suddenly appear pages of sketches of strange
embryos, of babies and kittens and puppies, all cases of morbid
hypertrophy.  "Is want of proportion inevitable in all growth?
Nature seems to find it so, but she always has been a roundabout
fumbler.  She starts out to make a leg, and when it comes out a
wing she says, 'Eureka!  I MEANT to do that.'  But in DESIGNED
WORK?  In engineering for example?"</p><p>His mind goes off to the making of castings, the waste in grinding,
the problems that arise in assembling a machine.</p><p>"Nature corrects the disproportions of growth by varying the
endocrines," he reflects.  "And when a house has got its frames set
up and its walls built, we turn out the masons and put in the
plasterers and painters.  So now.  A change of régime in the
world's affairs is indicated.  New endocrinals.  Fresh artisans."</p><p>This particular entry in the notebook is dated April 7, 2027.  It
is one of the earliest appearances of what presently became a
current phrase, "change of régime".</p><p>The preoccupations of Theotocopulos with the physical and mental
aspects of love, his extraordinary knack of linking physiological
processes with the highest emotional developments, need not concern
us here, important as they are in the history of æsthetic analysis.
For a year or so he is concentrated upon his great "Desire Frieze"
in the Refectory of the Art Library at Barcelona, and he thinks no
more of politics.  He likes the architects with whom he is
associated; he approves of the developments at Barcelona, and he is
given a free hand.  "These fellows do as they like," he remarks.
"A great change from all those damned committees, 'sanctioning'
this or asking you to 'reconsider' that."  Then he comes under the
influence of that very original young woman from Argentina, also in
her way a great artist, Juanita Mackail.  Sketches of her,
memoranda of poses and gestures, introduce her.  Then he remarks:
"This creature thinks."  So far he has never named her.  Then she
appears as "J" and becomes more and more frequent.</p><p>"There is something that frightens me about a really intelligent
woman.  Was it Poe or De Quincey—it must have been De Quincey—who
dreamt of a woman with breasts that suddenly opened and became
eyes?  Horrid!  To find you are being looked at like that."</p><p>Following this a page has been torn out by him, the only page he
ever tore out, and we are left guessing about it.</p><p>An abrupt return to political speculation in the notebooks follows.
A number of entries begin, "J says", or end, "This is J's idea."</p><p>Then some pages later he repeats:  "This creature thinks.  Do I?
Only with my fingers.  Language is too abstract for me.  Or is it
true, as she says, that I am mentally lazy.  MENTALLY LAZY—after I
had been talking continuously to her for three hours!</p><p>"It seems all my bright little thoughts don't amount to anything
compared with the stuff these social psychologists are doing.  I
have a lot to learn.  I suppose J would schoolmistress anybody."</p><p>The notebooks keep the fragile grace and mental vigour of Juanita
Mackail alive to this day.  She was the sort of woman who would
have been a socialist revolutionary in the nineteenth century, a
commissar in Early Soviet Russia or a hard worker for the Modern
State in the middle twentieth century.  Now she was giving all the
time her strongly decorative idiosyncrasy left free to the peculiar
politics of the period.  It is plain that before she met
Theotocopulos she was already politically minded.  She had had a
feeling that the world was in some way not going right, but her
clear perception of what had to be done about it came only with her
liaison with him.  The notebooks with their frankness and brutality
tell not only a very exceptional love story, but what is perhaps
inseparable from every worthwhile love story, a mutual education.
Theotocopulos was her first and only lover.  To begin with he had
treated her as casually as he had treated the many other women in
his life, and then it is plain that, as he began to find her out,
his devotion to her became by degrees as great or greater than her
devotion to him.</p><p>He studied her.  He made endless notes about her.  We know exactly
how she affected him.  How he affected her we are left to guess,
but it is plain that for her there was at once the magnificence of
his gifts and the appeal of his wayward childishness.  The former
overwhelmed her own.  It is plain in her surviving work.  The
earlier work is the best.  He asks twice, "Am I swamping J?  Her
stuff is losing character.  She is borrowing my eyes.  That last
cartoon.  Am I to blame?  It WAS such lovely stuff.  Once upon a
time."  And he writes:  "This maternity specialization is Nature's
meanest trick on women.  If they are not going to be mothers, if
they CAN'T be mothers, why on earth should they be saturated with
motherhood?  Why should J think more about getting me a free hand
to do what I please than she does about her own work?  She does.  I
haven't asked her.  Or have I, in some unconscious way, asked her?
No, it's just her innate vicious mothering.  I am her beloved son
and lover and the round world is my brother, and every day her
proper work deteriorates and she gets more political and social–
psychological on our account."</p><p>From that point onward the trend of these notebooks towards
politics becomes very strong.  The early volumes express the
resentments of an isolated man of extreme creative power who finds
himself singlehanded and powerless in an unsympathetically ordered
world.  The late show that same individuality broadening to a
conception of the whole world as plastic material, sustained by a
sense of understanding and support, coming into relationship and
cooperation with an accumulating movement of kindred minds.  At
last it is not so much Theotocopulos who thinks as the awakening
æsthetic consciousness of the world community.</p><p>"The change of régime has to be like a chick breaking out of its
egg.  The shell has to be broken.  BUT THE SHELL HAD TO BE THERE.
Let us be just.  There is proportion in time as well as in space.
If the shell is broken too soon there is nothing to be done but
make a bad omelette.  But if it isn't broken at the proper time,
the chick dies and stinks."</p><p>The forty–seventh notebook is devoted almost entirely to a
replanning of the subject of his early animadversions, the Ligurian
coast.  That notebook proved to be so richly suggestive that to–day
some of his sketches seem to be actual drawings of present
conditions, the treatment of the Monaco headland for example, and
the reduction of the terraces.  But his dreams of orange–groves are
already quaint, because he knew nothing of the surprises in tree
form that the experimental botanists were preparing.  The forty–
ninth booknote is also devoted to planning.  "Plans for a world,"
he writes on the first page.  "Contributions."  He seems to have
amused himself with this book at irregular intervals.  There are
some brilliant anticipations in it and also some incredible
fantasies.  Occasionally, like every prophet, he finds detail too
much for him and lapses into burlesque.</p><p>There is a very long note of a very modern spirited discussion
about individuality which he had with Juanita when apparently they
were staying together at Montserrat.  The notes are the
afterthoughts of this talk, "shots at statement" as he would have
called them, and they bring back to the reader a picture of that
vanished couple who strolled just sixty years ago among the tumbled
rocks and fragrant shrubs beneath the twisted pines of that high
resort, both of them so acutely responsive to the drift of ideas
that made the ultimate revolution—she intent and critical, holding
on to her argument against his plunging suggestions, like someone
who flies a kite in a high wind.</p><p>"The individual is for the species; but equally the species is for
the individual.</p><p>"Man lives for the State in order to live by and through—and in
spite of—the State.</p><p>"Life is a pendulum that swings between service and assertion.
Resist, obey, resist, obey.</p><p>"Order, discipline, health, are nothing except to make the world
safe for the æsthetic life."</p><p>"We are Stoics that we may be Epicureans."</p><p>"Exercise and discipline are the cookery but not the meal of life.</p><p>"Here as ever—PROPORTION.  But how can proportion be determined
except æsthetically?</p><p>"The core of life is wilfulness."</p><p>So they were thinking in 2046.  Have we really got very much
further to–day?</p></section><footer/></body></html>