<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>5: The Text Resumes: The Tyranny of the Second Council</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch04s04.xhtml" title="4: The Schooling of Mankind"/><link rel="next" href="ch04s06.xhtml" title="6: Æsthetic Frustration: The Note Books of Ariston Theotocopulos"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="5: The Text Resumes: The Tyranny of the Second Council" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268641274080"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">5: The Text Resumes: The Tyranny of the Second Council</h2></div></div></div><p>The Air Dictatorship is also called by some historians the Puritan
Tyranny.  We may perhaps give a section to it from this point of
view.</p><p>"Puritan" is a misused word.  Originally invented to convey a
merely doctrinal meticulousness among those Protestants who
"protested" against the Roman version of Catholicism, it came to be
associated with a severely self–disciplined and disciplinary life,
a life in which the fear of indolence and moral laxity was the
dominant force.  At its best it embodied an honourable realization:
"I shall do nothing worth while and nothing worth while will be
done unless I pull myself together and stiffen up my conduct."  If
the new Air Dictatorship was schooling the world with considerable
austerity, it was certainly schooling itself much more so.</p><p>The code of the first makers of the World–State had been a simple
one.  "Tell the truth," they insisted; "maintain the highest
technical standards, control money and do not keep it, give your
powers ungrudgingly to the service of the World–State."  That
seemed to leave them free for a good deal of refreshing self–
indulgence, and it did.  They ate, drank, and were merry, made love
very freely, envied and competed with one another for power and
distinction, and set no adequate guard upon the growth of rivalries
and resentments.  Our history has glanced at the fall and death of
Essenden, but this is only one episode in the long and complicated
history of the private lives of the first world committee.  Slowly
the details are being elucidated and analysed by a body of
historical students.  Except that the victims are dead, and cannot
hear, the results are as pitiless as the old Christian fancy of the
Recording Angel and his Book on Resurrection Day.</p><p>They appear as very pitifully human; their sins happened to them,
they were taken unawares in phases of fatigue, by resentment, by
sensuality or flattery.  Women were attracted by their prestige and
offered the reassurance of love to their weaker moments.  In many
cases the moral downfall was due to the very limitlessness of the
devotion with which they first gave themselves to their world task.
They worked without rest.  Then they would suddenly find themselves
worn bare, bankrupt of moral energy.  They had made no proper
balance between the public task and the inward desire.  Outbreaks
of evil temper would follow, or phases of indolence or gross
indulgence.  The Fellowship was disconcerted; the outer world ran
with scandal.  "These Fellows," said their critics, "are no better
than the pretenders and rascals of the old régime.  Rin Kay, the
wise, is consumed with affection for his little friend, and
Ardasher of the experimental aeroplanes makes his young men do
dangerous stunts to please a girl.  Morovitz is collecting Persian
miniatures quite unscrupulously and Fedor Galland spends half his
time now making a garden at Babylon."</p><p>The ambitious young men who were little boys when the first
conference at Basra was held were educated by teachers who were
none the less harshly zealous because they were doing relatively
inconspicuous work and had no little friends nor miniatures nor
gardens to amuse them.  These teachers had a lively sense of their
leaders' defects and of their own modest but real moral
superiority.  The youngsters under their teaching were saturated
with constructive enthusiasm, but they were trained also to judge
and condemn the weaknesses of their spent and tired predecessors.
They learnt that the brightness of this new world that had been
made for them was in danger from the very men who had made it.  The
technically more skilful and intensive teaching that had been given
them had made them more self–conscious and wary in their behaviour,
and far more capable of managing the detail of their lives.  They
were simple in principle and hard in detail.  They had a modern
wisdom about diet and indulgence; they regarded lack of fitness as
a crime.</p><p>The difference is evident in Historical Pictures, where one
usually sees the older generation dressed either carelessly or
picturesquely and often either self–consciously or gracelessly
posed, while the younger men and women in the simpler and plainer
clothing that was coming into fashion carry themselves like
athletes.  Austerity has become a second nature to them.  Devotion
and the sacrifice of the individual they carried to such a pitch
that, for instance, it was considered unseemly for them to have
portraits made, and there was no record kept of the names of the
chairmen and of the movers of motions in the central committee
during their ascendency.  It has needed special research to rescue
some of the names of this second generation of world rulers, who
set up the Puritan Tyranny and made the Socialist World–State
secure.  One of the moving spirits was certainly Han H'su and
another Antoine Ayala.</p><p>They ousted their predecessors without any coup d'état, one by one,
through sheer superiority in energy and working power.  The great
revolution was over; the World–State was in being.  But it was not
secure.  It was a time for just such continuous detailed work as
only a naturally able and energetic type with a hard training could
hope to do.  They were not selected by any voting or politics to
fill the Council, they were selected by their own staying and
driving power.  The milder or subtler types could not keep the pace
and fell into less authoritative positions.  The influence of
certain teachers and groups of teachers was very considerable.
Three schools, the Unamuno Foundation at Coimbra, the Columbia
University of New York, and the Tokio Social College, accounted for
more than a third of the World Council in 2017.</p><p>For nearly forty years the new Council, with occasional renewals,
worked and kept a whole generation of men and women working.  As
Aldous Huxley (1894–2004), one of the most brilliant of reactionary
writers, foretold of them, they "tidied up" the world.</p><p>There can be no denying the purification and rarefaction of the
human scene that was achieved during their sway.  They tightened up
the disciplines of the Modern State Fellowship, and nevertheless
the proportion of the Fellowship increased until it bade fair to
become the larger moiety of adult mankind.  The mental habits of
the Fellowship, its habitual bearing, extended through the whole
population.  The Tyranny, says Vordin, altered the human face for
ever.  It closed the mouth and made the lips firmer, made the eyes
steadier and more candid, opened the brow, altered the poise of the
head, obliterated a number of wrinkles and habits of expression.
Portraits of the earlier and later time confirm this generalization.
One type of odd–character after another became rare and began to
disappear from the human comedy.  Rascals and recalcitrants
grew old, sat in the sun for a time rather protestingly and
vanished.  They took many disagreeable and some whimsical casts
of countenance with them.  Sexual prostitution ceased and eliminated
a characteristic defiance from feminine carriage.  The trader found
he had nothing to trade with and came into the employment of the
Supply Control.  Gambling, horse–racing, sport, generally went out
of fashion, and those queer oblongs of pasteboard, "playing cards",
retired to museums, never to emerge again.  Every one of these
vanishing interests or practices took its own scores of social
types, of "reaction systems", to use the modern phrase, away with
it.  Faces ceased to be masks.</p><p>Every year the world grew safer for the candid.  The need for
cunning and wary self–restraint diminished enormously, the habit of
making a face a "mask".  Humanity was extroverted.  A lively self–
forgetful interest in external things becomes more and more patent.
The "worried" look of the introspective habit of mind disappears.
"Everyone must know plainly," said the new rulers.  "Men must be
perplexed no more."  The old religions could not emulate the moral
prestige of the new cult, and even the resentments of the
persecution that deprived them of their last shreds of educational
influence could not preserve them.  For nearly forty years this
rule of the new saints, this resolute simplification and smoothing
out of life, went on.</p><p>History becomes a record of increasingly vast engineering
undertakings, and cultivations, of the pursuit of minerals and of
the first deep borings into the planet.  New mechanisms appeared,
multiplied, and were swept away by better mechanisms.  The face of
the earth changed.  The scientific redistribution of population
began.  Yet there was little likeness to the world of to–day, as we
know it.  No age in human history has left us such strange and
uncongenial pictures.</p><p>Costume was not unpleasant during this period, because of its
simplicity; the human figures in the scene at least are tolerable;
but these scientific Puritans also produced some of the clumsiest
architecture, the most gaunt and ungainly housing blocks, the
dullest forests, endless vistas of straight stems, and the vastest,
most hideous dams and power–stations, pylon–lines, pipe–lines, and
so forth that the planet has ever borne.  But at any rate they
flooded the Sahara and made the North African littoral the
loveliest land in the world.  The productivity of mankind was now
advancing by leaps and bounds, in spite of the severe restraint
presently put upon the introduction of fresh labour–saving devices;
and yet these Puritans were consumed by an overwhelming fear of
leisure both for themselves and others.  They found it morally
necessary to keep going and to keep everybody else going.  They
INVENTED work for the Fellowship and all the world.  Earth became
an ant–hill under their dominion clean and orderly but needlessly
"busy".  So harshly had they reacted against the weaknesses of
their seniors and so unable were they to mitigate their own self–
imposed severities.</p><p>Let us cast up the good mankind can attribute to this strange phase
of sternness and grim repression.  For all the faint masochist and
sadistic flavour of its closing years, the good was beyond all
measure greater than the evil.  "The obliteration of out–of–date
moral values" (the phrase is Antoine Ayala's) "and the complete
establishment of a code of rigorous and critical self–control, of
habitual service, creative activity, cooperation, of public as well
as private good manners, and invariable truthfulness, were achieved
for all time.  We grow up so easily now into one free, abundant,
and happy world that we do not realize the effort still needed even
in the year 2000 to keep life going upon what seem now to us the
most natural and simple lines possible.  We find it almost
impossible to imagine the temptations to slacken at work, loiter,
do nothing, 'look for trouble', seek 'amusement', feel bored and
take to trivial or mischievous 'time–killing' occupations, that
pursued the ill–trained under–vitalized, objectless common citizen
before 2000 C.E.  Still more difficult is it to realize how subtly
these temptations were diffused through the mass and how hard they
made a well–directed life.  We have to trust the psychological
experts about that."</p><p>The New Puritans "disinfected" the old literature, for example.  It
is hard to see that now as an urgent necessity.  These old stories,
plays, and poems seem to us to convey the quaintest and most
inexplicable systems of motivation conceivable, and we cannot
imagine people being deflected by them; they might as easily be led
astray by the figures on a Chinese screen or an Hellenic
sarcophagus; but before the persecution those books were, as one
censor called them, "fever rags".  They stood then for "real life".
They provided patterns for behaviour and general conduct.  That
queer clowning with insults and repartees, that insincerely
sympathetic mocking of inferiors, that denigration of superiors,
which constituted "humour" in the old days, strikes us as either
fatuous or malicious.  We cannot understand, for instance, the joy
our ancestors found in the little blunders and misconceptions of
ill–educated people.  But then they also laughed at the cripples
who still abounded in the world!  Equally distasteful now is most
of their "romance" with its false stresses, its unnecessary
sacrifices and desperations.  "Romance", says Paul Hennessey, "is
essentially the violent and miserable reaction of weak spirits to
prohibitions they cannot fairly overcome."</p><p>We find the books glorifying war and massacre, and the tangled
masses of suggestion that elaborated the innate hostility and
excitement caused by difference of racial type, so unconvincing
that it is difficult to believe that they ever gripped.  But they
did grip and compel.  They drove innumerable men to murders,
lynchings, deliberate torture.  They dressed the foulest and
cruellest of crimes in heroic colours.  There had to be a break
with these traditions before they could be seen as we see them now.
It needed the heroic "priggishness" of the Air Dictatorship,
putting away the old literature and drama for a time, suppressing
the suggestion systems of the old religions and superstitions,
jailing and segregating men and women for "hate incitement",
ruthlessly eliminating sexual incitation from the lives of the
immature and insisting upon a universal frank sexual hygiene, to
cleanse the human mind for good and all and inaugurate the
unconstrained civilization of to–day.  There was no other way to
Renaissance.</p><p>Joseph Koreniovsky has called the Puritan Tyranny "the cold bath
that braced up mankind after the awakening".  Man, he says, was
still "frowsty–minded" and "half asleep" in the early twenty–first
century, still in urgent danger of a relapse into the confused
nightmare living of the Age of Frustration.  You may call it a
tyranny, but it was in fact a release; it did not suppress men, but
obsessions.  None of us now can fully realize the value of that
"disentanglement from tradition", because now we are all
disentangled.</p><p>And next to this ruthless "mental disinfection" of the world, and
indeed inseparable from it, we must put the physical disinfection
of mankind to the credit of the Air Dictatorship.  Between 2000 and
2040 every domicile in the world was either destroyed and replaced,
or reconditioned and exhaustively disinfected.  There was an
immense loss of "picturesqueness" in that process, and we shiver
nowadays when we look at pictures of the white bare streets, the
mobile rural living–boxes, the bleakly "cheerful" public buildings,
the plain cold interiors with their metallic furniture, which
everywhere replaced the huts, hovels, creeper–clad cottages and
houses, old decaying stone and brick town halls, market houses,
churches, mosques, factories and railway stations in which our
tough if ill–proportioned and undersized forefathers assembled
about their various archaic businesses.</p><p>But between the same years the following diseases, the names of
which abound in the old histories, and the nature of which we can
hardly imagine, vanish from the human records: catarrh, influenza,
whooping cough, sleeping sickness, cholera, typhus, typhoid,
bubonic plague, measles, and a score of other infectious scourges.
(Only yellow fever remained as a serious infection after 2050.
That demanded the special effort of 2079 for its extirpation.)
Syphilis and indeed all those diseases known as venereal, were
stamped out completely in two generations; they were afflictions so
horrible and disgusting that their description is not now
considered suitable for the general reader.  There was a similar
world–wide attack on plant diseases and distortions, but of that
the student will learn in his Botanical History.</p><p>The psychologists who are rewriting human history have still many
open questions to settle about the training and early influences
that gave the world this peculiar group of rulers, and so the
account of its hardening and deterioration remains incomplete.
They admit that the Tyranny was in essence a liberation, but they
insist that it left vitally important desires in the human make–up
unsatisfied.  Old traditions and mischievous obsessions were rooted
in these desires, and the Tyranny had not been content with an
eradication of the old traditions.  It had denied the desires.  It
had pulled up the soil with the weeds.  It had exalted incessant,
even if pointless, activity above everything else in life.</p><p>Overwork, a strained strenuousness, has been a common characteristic
of the rulers of mankind in the past.  It shows through the Edicts
of Asoka, for example, and particularly in Rock Edict VI (Asoka, D.
R. Bhandarkar, 1932, Classical Historical Studies, 21–118).  "I am
never satisfied," runs the Edict, "with the exertion or with
dispatch of business.  The welfare of the whole world is an esteemed
duty with me.  And the root of that, again, is this, namely,
exertion and dispatch of business."  A great majority of the
successful Cæsars and Autocrats from Shi–Hwang–Ti to Hitler have
the same strenuousness—Alexander the Great perhaps was the chief
exception, but then his father had done the work before him.
Mussolini, the realizer of Italian Fascismo, in his Talks to Ludwig
(Historical Documents Series 100, 319) betrays an equal disposition
for single–handed accomplishment and an equal disinclination to
relinquish responsibility.</p><p>All the chief figures of the Air Dictatorship betray, upon
scrutiny, signs of the same drive to do too much and still to do
more.  They display all the traits of a collective weary conqueror,
unable to desist and think and adapt himself.  They went on ruling
and fighting when their victory was won.  They had tidied up the
world for ever and still they went on tidying.  After their first
real successes they manifest an extreme reluctance to bring new
blood into the responsible administrative task.  They had arisen to
power as a group by their usefulness, because they were unavoidably
necessary to those original founders of the World–State whom they
first served and then by sheer insistence upon performance pushed
out of authority and replaced.  The three virtues in a ruler
according to Han H'su were punctuality, precision, and persistence.
But it was a dictum of Paidrick Lynd's that "indolence is the
mother of organization".  They had none of that blessed gift of
indolence.  When the legacy of work that the first world revolution
had left them was exhausted, they brought things at last to the
necessity for a final revolution through their sheer inability to
organize a direct succession to themselves or to invent fresh
undertakings.</p><p>That final revolution was the most subtle of all the substitutions
of power that have occurred in human affairs, the most subtle and
so far the last.  The Dictatorship could suppress overt resistance;
it could impose obedience to its myriads of injunctions and rules.
But it could not suppress the development of general psychology nor
the penetration of its own legislative and administrative
activities by enquiry and criticism.</p><p>The Department of General Psychology had grown rapidly until it had
become the most vigorous system of activities in the scientific
faculty of the Modern State Fellowship.  In its preparatory stages
it had taken the place of the various "Arts" and Law curricula of
the old régime.  It was the modernization of the "humanities".  The
founders of the World–State had given this particular department of
the scientific faculty almost as great a directive and modifying
power over both the Educational and Legal Controls as it exercises
to–day.  Even then it was formally recognized as the responsible
guardian in the theory of Modern State organization.  It more than
realized the intentions of De Windt.  It became the thought, as the
World Council had become the will, of mankind acting as a whole.
And since the education and legal adjustment of the World–State was
thus under the direction of a department of research continually
advancing, they differed diametrically in character from the
education and teaching of the old world order.</p><p>The student cannot keep this difference, this flat contrast, too
clearly in mind.  He will never understand the historical process
without it.  The Old Education existed to preserve traditions and
institutions.  Progressive forces arose as a dissent from it and
operated outside its machinery.  In the eighteenth, nineteenth, and
early twentieth century education was always a generation or so
behind living contemporary ideas and the schoolmaster was a drag on
mankind.  But the New Education, based on a swiftly expanding
science of relationship, was no longer the preservation of a
tradition, but instead the explanation of a creative effort in the
light of a constantly most penetrating criticism of contemporary
things.  The new schoolmaster showed the way, and the new education
kept steadily ahead of contemporary social fact.  The difference of
the New Law and the Old Law was strictly parallel.  If a man of the
year 1900 had been told of a progressive revolution led by lawyers
and schoolmasters inspired by scientific ideas, he would have taken
it as a rather preposterous joke, but to–day we ask, "How else can
the continuity of a progressive revolution be sustained?"</p><p>The failure of the German revolution of 1918 and the relapse of
that unfortunate country into the puerility and brutish follies of
Hitlerism was entirely due to the disregard of the elementary
principle that no revolution could be a real and assured revolution
until it has completely altered the educational system of the
community.  Every effective old–world revolution was a revolt
against an established education and against the established law.</p><p>The rôle of the modern Education Control in preserving, correcting,
and revivifying the progressive process in human affairs had
already been manifested by the supersession of the leading
personalities of the Basra conference in the World Council by their
successors who became the Air Dictatorship.  Now these men in their
turn found the instruments of government becoming recalcitrant in
their hands and obeying the impulse of unfamiliar ideas.  They had
cleared and cleansed the site while social science had been
preparing the idea of the new structures that were to stand upon
it, and now they found themselves confronted by an impulse towards
creation and enrichment entirely discordant with their habits of
administration.  Their subordinates began to send back the
instructions given them as "insufficient and not in accordance with
the psychology of the workers"—or other people—"concerned".
Schemes were condemned by those to whom they were entrusted as
unnecessarily toilsome or needlessly ungracious.  Workers took
matters into their own hands and demanded more pleasant processes
or more beautiful results.  The committee was disposed at first to
insist upon unquestioning obedience.  Thereupon the Education
Control produced a masterful argument to show "the social
harmfulness of unquestioning obedience".</p><p>There could be no greater contrast in the world than that between
the older revolutionary crises in human affairs and this later
conflict of wills.  The old revolutions were at best frantic,
bawling, sentimental affairs in which there was much barricading of
roads and destruction of property; people were shot abundantly and
carelessly and a new régime stumbled clumsily to responsibility on
the ruin and reversal of its predecessor.  Such revolutions were
insurrections of discontent against established institutions.  But
this last revolution was the cool and effectual indictment of the
world executive by a great world wide educational system.  It was
not an insurrection; it was a collateral intervention.  The new
order arose beside its predecessor, took matters out of its hands
and replaced it.</p><p>The need for an intolerant militant stage of the World–State had
passed.  The very reason for the disciplines of the Puritan Tyranny
had been dissolved away in the completeness of its victory.  But
the last men to realize this were the old men who now sat trying to
find tasks to keep humanity out of mischief in the bureau of the
World Council.</p></section><footer/></body></html>