<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>3: Futile Insurrection</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch04s02.xhtml" title="2: Melodramatic Interlude"/><link rel="next" href="ch04s04.xhtml" title="4: The Schooling of Mankind"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="3: Futile Insurrection" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268641259440"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">3: Futile Insurrection</h2></div></div></div><p>The notes show the historians of 2106 convinced that there was no
real complicity between Elizabeth Horthy and the leaders of the
Federated Nationalists who now broke out into open revolt.  The
impression of her character made by her recorded words and deeds
is, they argue, quite incompatible with the idea that if she had
indeed been a revolutionary, she would have abandoned her fellow
conspirators for a melodramatic suicide because of the execution of
Essenden.  Far more like her would it have been for her to fly to
the rebels in Germany and give herself passionately to avenge and
vindicate his memory.  But plainly she did not care a rap for the
monarchist conspiracy, and it is possible that she did not know of
its existence.  Both she and Essenden, there can be little doubt,
lived and died loyal, in intention at least, to the Modern State.</p><p>But it suited the revolt to seize upon her tragedy and use her as
one of its symbols, and it was long believed that Essenden had
retracted the socialist cosmopolitanism of the Basra Conference in
favour of Federated Nationalism.  It is interesting to find the
legend of the poor old League of Nations presently become more
powerful than its living reality, and ironical that it should
supply the formula for an attempt to divide up the world again into
"sovereign" fragments.  The declaration of the so–called Prince
Manfred of Bavaria put the League into the forefront of his
promises.  Alternatively he spoke of it as a World Federation of
Free Peoples, and he promised Freedom of Thought, Freedom of
Teaching, Freedom of Trade and Enterprise, Freedom of Religious
Profession, Freedom from Basic English, Freedom from Alien
Influence everywhere.  As a foretaste of these good things, he
released a little pogrom in the Frankfurt district where a few
professing Jews still lingered.</p><p>[From this point to another which I shall indicate when I reach it
I am able to give a fairly trustworthy transcription of the notes—
ED.]</p><p>There was never anything that amounted to actual war during this
period of disturbance; nothing that could be called a battle.
The World Council had the supreme advantage of holding all
communications in its hands, and, as military and naval experts
could have told the rebels, there is no warfare without
communications.  Prince Manfred issued some valiant proclamations
"to the World" before he took his tabloid, but since Basic English
was repudiated by his movement, they were translated into only a
few local languages, printed on stolen paper by hidden hand–
presses, and sought after chiefly by collectors.  The jamming of
the public radio service was mischief rather than revolt.  At first
there was a certain revival of the manufacture of munitions in
factories that had been seized by rebel bands, but generally these
ended their output after at most a few weeks under the soporific
influence of Pacificin.  There were a few deserters from the Air
Police and a certain number of small private aeroplanes in
nationalist hands; but the net work of registration, vigilant
police patrols, and the absence of independent aerodromes soon
swept rebellion out of the air.</p><p>There remained the bomb, the forbidden pistol, the dagger and the
ambush.  It was these that made the revolt formidable, forced
espionage, search raids, restriction of private movement and
counter violence upon the World Control, and rendered the last
stages of the struggle a grim and indeed a terrible chapter in
human history.  In narrow streets, in crowds and conferences, in
the bureaus of administrations and upon the new roads, lurked the
death–dealing patriot.  He merged insensibly with the merely
criminal organizations of blackmail and crime.</p><p>It was this murder campaign, the "Warfare of the Silenced and
Disarmed", as Prince Manfred put it, which stiffened the face and
hardened the heart of the Modern State for half a century.  It took
to "preventive" measures; it began to suspect and test; that
horrible creature, the agent provocateur, was already busy again
before 2000.  He was busy for another decade; he did not certainly
vanish from the world until the Declaration of Mégève in 2059, but
there is no record of his activity after 2030.  And the government
which had begun its killing with Arden Essenden and Prince Manfred
came to realize the extreme decisiveness and facility of the lethal
tabloid.  For the grosser forms of execution had given place to
this polite method, and every condemned man could emulate the Death
of Socrates, assemble his friends if he chose, visit some lovely
place, or retire to his bureau.  In vain the veteran Rin Kay
protested in the committee that, just as he had argued long ago
that men were not good enough to be Machiavellian, so now he
declared they were not good enough to be given powers of life or
death, incarceration or relief over their fellows.  "You murder
yourselves when you kill," he said.</p><p>The rebels, however, were killing with considerable vigour and
persistence, and their victims had no such calm and grace in their
last moments.  They were stabbed, shot, waylaid and beaten to
death.</p><p>"For a terror," wrote Kramer, "death must be terrible."</p><p>"For murder," said Antoine Ayala, "death must be inevitable."</p><p>In the end the penal code did seem to achieve its end.  There were
5703 political murders in 2005, and 1114 in 2007.  The last
recorded occurred in 2034.  The total is over 120,000.  But during
these twenty–nine years there were 47,066 political executions!
Rihani estimates that more than seven per cent of these were
carried out upon anonymous, circumstantial, or otherwise
unsatisfactory evidence.  Most were practically sentences by courts
martial.  The millennium arrived in anything but millennial
fashion.</p></section><footer/></body></html>