<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>1: Gap in the Text</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch04.xhtml" title="Book the Fourth"/><link rel="next" href="ch04s02.xhtml" title="2: Melodramatic Interlude"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="1: Gap in the Text" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268641229020"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">1: Gap in the Text</h2></div></div></div><p>So far I have been transcribing, with very little correction and no
alteration, the text of Raven's dream book as he left it fully
written out.  But at this point, that fully written out history
breaks off.  The record of the next seventy or eighty years is
represented only by an untidy mass of notes in the perfectly
abominable private shorthand Raven used.  Then comes the concluding
chapter fully written out again.</p><p>I cannot say with any certainty why Raven left this very vital part
of his story obscure and confused while he went on to the very last
part of all.  But I have my own ideas of what happened in his
brain.  In the first place he had a very human impulse to realize
the issue of this world revolution that was unfolding in these
notes, and it was easier, therefore, because it was more
attractive, for him to write out the later part first.  And in the
next the intervening matter was really much more intricate for him
to handle.  It had, if I may use the expression, "come through his
mind" with difficulty and against resistances.  His general ideas
had been prepared for the new wars, for the post–war breakdown and
for a world rule based on air power, and they had also been
prepared for the steadily progressive World–State of the final
phase.  But they had not been prepared for the profound and complex
mental and spiritual struggles of three–quarters of a century which
inaugurated the new order.  Those he had not thought out.</p><p>Whether it was really a clairvoyant vision he had of a real future
text book of history, or whether all this matter was an eruption
from his subconscious mind, hardly affects the manifest fact that
all this part came against the grain.  One of the strongest
arguments for the view that this Outline of the Future was evolved
by Raven from his inner consciousness is the fact that there are
several passages in which he seems to argue with himself, and that
the quiet unhurrying assurance of the earlier and later narratives
is not sustained in these middle parts.</p><p>I do not think it was mere chance that pulled him up precisely at
the point when he came to the gassing of the Pope and the martyrdom
of Saint Odet of Ostia.  I think that this incident struck him as
cardinal, as marking a supremely significant corner which humanity
was turning.  It was something that had to happen and it was
something he had never let his mind dwell upon.  It ended a
practical truce that had endured for nearly three centuries in the
matter of moral teaching, in the organization of motive, in what
was then understood as religion.  It was the first killing in a new
religious conflict.  The new government meant to rule not only the
planet but the human will.  One thing meant the other.  It had
realized that to its own surprise.  And Raven, with an equal
surprise, had realized that so it had to be.</p><p>Nearly a year earlier the One World–State had been declared at
Basra.  There already it had been asserted plainly that a new order
must insist upon its own specific education, and that it could not
tolerate any other forms of training for the world–wide lives it
contemplated.  But to say a thing like that is not to realize its
meaning.  Things of that sort had been said before, and passed like
musical flourishes across the minds of men.  The new government did
not apprehend the fullness of its own intentions until this
unpremeditated act of supreme sacrilege forced decision upon it.
But now it had struck down the very head of Catholic Christianity
and killed an officiating priest in the midst of his ministrations.
It had gripped that vast world organization, the Catholic Church,
and told it in effect to be still for evermore.  It was now awake
to its own purpose.  It might have retreated or compromised.  It
decided to go on.</p><p>Ten days later air guards descended upon Mecca and closed the chief
holy places.  A number of religious observances were suppressed in
India, and the slaughter–houses in which kosher food was prepared
in an antiquated and unpleasant manner for orthodox Jews were
closed throughout the world.  An Act of Uniformity came into
operation everywhere.  There was now to be one faith only in the
world, the moral expression of the one world community.</p><p>Raven was taken unawares, as the world of 1978 was taken unawares,
by this swift unfolding of a transport monopoly into a government,
a social order and a universal faith.  And yet the experiment of
Soviet Russia and the practical suppression of any other religion
than the so–called communism that had been forced upon it might
well have prepared his mind for the realization that for any new
social order there must be a new education of all who were to live
willingly and helpfully in it, and that the core of an education is
a religion.  Plainly he had not thought out all that such a
statement means.  Like almost all the liberal–minded people of our
time, he had disbelieved in every form of contemporary religion,
and he had tolerated them all.  It had seemed to him entirely
reasonable that minds could be left to take the mould of any
pattern and interpretation of life that chanced upon them without
any serious effect upon their social and political reactions.  It
is extraordinary how such contradictory conceptions of living still
exist side by side in our present world with only a little mutual
nagging.  But very evidently that is not going to be accepted by
the generations that are coming.  They are going to realize that
there can be only one right way of looking at the world for a
normal human being and only one conception of a proper scheme of
social reactions, and that all others must be wrong and misleading
and involve destructive distortions of conduct.</p><p>Raven's dream book, as it unfolded the history of the last great
revolution in human affairs to him, shattered all the evasive
optimism, all the kindly disastrous toleration and good fellowship
of our time, in his mind.  If there was to be peace on earth and
any further welfare for mankind, if there was to be an end to wars,
plunderings, poverty and bitter universal frustration, not only the
collective organization of the race but the moral making of the
individual had to begin anew.  The formal revolution that had taken
place was only the prelude to the real revolution; it provided only
the frame, the Provisional Government, within which the essential
thing, mental reconstruction, had now to begin.</p><p>That precarious first world government with its few millions of
imperfectly assimilated adherents, which now clutched the earth,
had to immobilize or destroy every facile system of errors,
misinterpretations, compensations and self–consolations that still
survived to confuse the minds of men; it had to fight a battle
against fear, indolence, greed and jealousy in every soul in the
world, the souls of its own people most of all, and win.  Or it had
to lapse.  It had to do that within a definite time.  If it did not
win within that time, then dissension and relapse were inevitable
and one more century of blundering and futility would have to be
added to the long record of man's martyrdom.  This new régime had
to clean up the racial mind or fail, and if it failed then in all
probability it would leave the race to drift back again to animal
individualism, and so through chaos to extinction.  Failures in the
past had been possible without general disaster, because they were
partial and local, but this was the decisive world effort.</p></section><footer/></body></html>