<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>4: The Schooling of Mankind</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch04s03.xhtml" title="3: Futile Insurrection"/><link rel="next" href="ch04s05.xhtml" title="5: The Text Resumes: The Tyranny of the Second Council"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="4: The Schooling of Mankind" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268641279220"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">4: The Schooling of Mankind</h2></div></div></div><p>And now again the shorthand notes are troubled, disturbed and
almost unreadable, and the resistances of Raven rise up and mingle
with the proper text.</p><p>It was the age–long issue between faith in compulsion and faith in
the goodwill of the natural man that had invaded the record.  It
affects me as I transcribe now; I do not see how it can fail to
affect any contemporary writer or reader.  I get again that
flavour, that slight but perceptible flavour of—what can I call it
but INHUMANITY?—in the historian's contribution.  These men whom
we anticipate here are different in their fundamental ideas.  This
short transition of a hundred and seventy years is marked by a
subtle change in the human heart.  I wonder if the same kind of
difference might not arise if we could bring a good contemporary
mind of the early eighteenth century into untempered contact with
our thoughts to–day.  Would not such a mind find us nowadays rather
hard and sceptical about things respected, rather harshly frank
about things biological, rather misshapen in our sentimentalities?</p><p>It is an old joke to revive such literary characters as Dr. Johnson
or Addison and make them discuss contemporary things, but generally
the fun goes no further than clothing modern reactions in old–
fashioned phrases and costume.  But in the light of my own response
to the harshly lucid, cold, and faintly contemptuous criticism of
our present resistances by the writer or writers of this 2106
document I find myself reviewing these old juxtapositions.  I see
that if we could indeed revive Johnson he would not only strike us
as an ill–mannered, offensive, inadaptable and tiresome old
gentleman who smelt unpleasantly and behaved worse, whose comments
on life and events would be wide of the mark and discoloured with
the echoes of antiquated controversies, but we should find that his
contact with us would be pervaded by an incurable distress at
our pace, at our strangely different values, our inhuman
humanitarianism, as it would have seemed to him, and our cruel
rationality.  He who had sat so sturdily against his background of
accepted and acceptable institutions, customs, and interpretations
would find that background vanished and himself like a poor martyr
in the arena with eyes upon him from every direction.  Of course he
would be hustled off to meet Mr. G. K. Chesterton, and that might
prove the most painful of all his encounters.  For Mr. Chesterton,
who is posed so often as an avatar of the old doctor belongs to his
own time quite as much as the most futuristic of us all.</p><p>I am a hostile critic of present conditions and a revolutionary in
essence; nevertheless, I can get on with the people about me
because, even though my song is a song of revolt, it is in the same
key and tempo as theirs; but I perceive that if I were transferred
to this infinitely happier and more spacious world the history of
Raven's reveals I should be continually and irreparably, in small
things and great things alike, discordant.  I should find nobody to
get the point of my intelligent observations; I should laugh
incomprehensively, fail to see the jokes that pleased these larger,
more vigorous people, and the business of life would hurry past me.
All sorts of things I had hoped for and forecast might be there—
but in some essential way different and alien to me.</p><p>It is one of the things that Raven's notes have taught me that a
human mind, an adult human mind anyhow, is much less easily
transplanted to a new time and climate than I had been wont to
assume.  To me, the story of Arden Essenden's bold leadership, his
acute self–consciousness, and his uncontrolled love for Elizabeth
Horthy seem matter for such another story, let us say, as
Meredith's Tragic Comedians; but the historian of the year 2106
finds him and her only material from which to dissect out the
treacherous egotism of passion.  Something in me rebels against
that, just as it rebels against the assumption that the World War
was a process of sheer waste, its heroisms and sacrifices blind
blundering, and its significance out of all proportion less than
the social and economic dislocations that caused it.</p><p>And now that I come to these disconnected records of the harshly
rational schooling of human motives under the Air Dictatorship,
records that even Raven found no zest in copying, my distaste is as
ineradicable as it is unreasonable.  I feel that, but for "the
accidents of space and time", I should have been one of the
actively protesting spirits who squirmed in the pitilessly
benevolent grip of the Air Dictatorship.  But whether it suits my
temperament or not, this story, as it came through Raven to me, has
to be told.</p><p>The men who made the great revolution and unified the world between
1965 and 1978 were men of practically the same mental assumptions
as our own.  They were in direct mental and moral continuity with
our contemporaries.  While the reader turns the page, if there is
any truth in this history, De Windt, still absolutely unknown, must
be working either in Berlin or London upon that Theory of the
Nucleated Modern State which was the decisive plan of that final
consolidation, publishers must already have read and rejected the
preliminary scheme of his great work, and in a year or so from now
some Mrs. Essenden will be choosing the name of Arden for her boy.
It is as close to us as that.  The men of the first World Council,
therefore, saw both sides of the business and wavered in feeling
between our tradition and the new order they were creating.  But
the subsequent generation which constituted the Air Dictatorship
had been shaped from the beginning in the aggressive bright new
schools of the Modern State nuclei, they had fed on a new
literature, they looked out upon fresh horizons, and their ideology
had been determined more than anything else by the social
psychologists and "new lawyers" of the American school.  They were
starkly constructive.  Nuance to them was obscurity and compromise
weakness.</p><p>It is plain that so far as the future was concerned the first World
Council with its rivalries and politics was far less effective than
the unobtrusive Educational Control which worked under it during
its régime and gradually drew together police, hygiene, schooling,
and literature into one powerful nexus of direction.  While the
World Council was fighting for and directing and carrying on the
unified World–State, the Educational Control was remoulding
mankind.  With the opening years of the twenty–first century (C.E.)
the erstwhile leading figures of the revolution fall back into
secondary places or vanish from the limelight altogether, and a
simpler–minded, more determined group of rules comes to the front.</p><p>[I resume my transcription here.]</p><p>"The world is various enough without artificial variety," was a
leading maxim of the Educational Control which created the men of
the Air Dictatorship; and a variant of this maxim was:  "It does
not increase the interest of the human assembly to suffer avoidable
mental cripples and defectives."  So this body of teachers set
themselves to guard new lives, beginning even with prenatal
circumstances, from what they esteemed to be physical and mental
distortion.  There was no shadow of doubt upon this score for the
Educational Control.  Every possible human being had to be brought
into the new communion.  Everyone was to be exposed to the
contagion of modernity.  Every year now increased the power of the
Modern State Fellowship; by 2000 it numbered five million; by 2010
thirteen.  Every increase enabled the Educational Control to thrust
its enquiring and compelling fingers more and more intimately into
the recesses of human life.  It had more men and women made to its
pattern and a greater force of teachers and inspectors it could
trust.</p><p>There can be no denying the excellence of the immediate physical
results.  Historical Scenes in a Hundred Volumes witnesses from
1990 onward, not only to the resumption of the advance in the
technique of picture–making and the abundance of pictures, but to
the restoration of physical welfare.  As the student turns over the
pages he sees man straighten himself again, grow physically, become
more alert.  The slouching foot–dragging men and women, the aimless
faces, the fattish and lumpish figures of improperly nourished
people, the wretched clothing and ignoble makeshift gear of the
Second Decline and Fall, disappear; after 1990 clothing is fresh
and simple, and after 2010 it begins to be austerely beautiful.</p><p>And this being achieved very largely through what the liberal
thought of the nineteenth century would certainly have called
"persecution".  It is plain that the earlier World Council was all
too disposed to leave great areas of the planet that did not "give
trouble" alone.  The new World Council, which is known also as the
Air Dictatorship, would have none of that.  There began a
systematic attack upon the "lapsed regions", as they were called
from the year 2006 onward.  The government set itself in that year
to "tidy up" the still half–barbaric peasant populations of Hayti,
Ireland, West and Central Africa, South Italy, American Georgia and
its associated states, Georgia in the Caucasus, Eastern Bengal,
regions where traditional superstitions, secret societies, magic
cults or sacrificial practices showed an obstinate persistence.
There was a definite hunt for medicine men, sorcerers, priests,
religious teachers, and organizers of sedition; they would be fined
or exiled, and parents and others would be fined for "impeding" the
education of their children at the cosmopolitan schools.</p><p>Many critics of the Air Dictatorship are of opinion that this was a
needless pursuit of dying customs and beliefs that might well have
been left to fade out into mere fantasies and affectations.  But
the new generation of rulers took life too seriously for that.  It
is an issue that can never be settled, since we can only know what
actually occurred.</p><p>The old Catholic Church, it seems, was still in existence in these
days, the last surviving Christian organization, but it was greatly
impoverished, and it had suffered severely from schisms, evidently
the result of imperfect communications throughout the dark decades.
There was a Pope in Dublin and another in Rome and a coloured Pope
in Pernambuco.  From the legal point of view the Irish Pope was the
most legitimate successor of St. Peter.  He had been duly elected
by the Conclave, but the Fascist organization objected that he was
not of Italian origin, his original surname being O'Dowd and his
Italian accent imperfect, and the cardinals were intimidated into a
new election.  Some feud between rival gang organizations in
America seems to have been involved in this split, but the details
are obscure and need not occupy the student's time here.  There was
in consequence a division of the American Catholic world between
the Dublin and the Roman communion, and this led to a murderous
series of feuds, riots, and small local wars.  "Down with the Wop
Pope!" said the Irish.  One is reminded of that earlier splitting
of the Church through the rivalry of the French monarchy and the
Central European imperial system that set up a rival Pope in
Avignon.</p><p>Ireland was the last stronghold of Christianity.  The Catholic
religion had been compulsory in South Ireland from 1944 until 1980,
and the Erse language, although that was largely corrupted by
unavoidable English words and locutions, had also been made
obligatory.  Overt Birth Control knowledge had been successfully
banned, though this produced no effect in the decline in
population, and the Modern State nuclei had been boycotted more
effectually there than in any other part of the world.  The
Dictatorship found itself fighting one of its most difficult
battles for power with this tenacious people.  The Irish came out
in revolt all over the world.  In Ireland after the maculated fever
the population never rose above two millions, but there was a
widespread Irish tradition throughout the English–speaking world.
Some of the more brilliant and formidable antagonists of this
schooling and drilling of our race that was going on, Paidrick
Lynd, Arthur Fitzgerald, and Bernard O'Dwyer for example, came from
Ireland.  Oddly enough none of these three was a Catholic, and
Fitzgerald at any rate had suffered a term of imprisonment for
blasphemy, but the spirit of opposition was either innate in them
or it had become ingrained in their natures.</p><p>Let the student note the open alternative at the end of the
preceding paragraph.  It raises a question that remains unsettled
to this day.  It is the clue to our contemporary moral problem.
The Air Dictatorship, with what was still a very under–developed
science of social psychology at its disposal, had come upon one of
the obscurest and most debatable of educational problems, the
variability of mental resistance to direction and the limits set by
nature to the ideal of an acquiescent co–operative world.  De
Windt, preoccupied by his gigantic schemes for world organization,
had treated the "spirit of opposition" as purely evil, as a vice to
be guarded against, as a trouble in the machinery that was to be
minimized as completely as possible.  The Air Dictatorship was
carrying out and did carry out its world settlements on those
assumptions.  One may well believe that the world could have been
unified into one enduring Pax Mundi in no other way.  And yet they
were faulty assumptions, and in the end they had to be abandoned
for subtler and better conceptions of social interaction.</p><p>As every practising teacher understands, resistance is a necessary
factor in teaching.  Soft non–resistant material takes an imprint
very readily only to lose it again very quickly.  Easy pupils make
teaching slipshod.  The difficulty but also the soundness of
teaching increases with the amount of reaction in the learner.  And
also resistance involves a certain element of collaboration; the
thing learnt becomes a resultant, incorporating elements introduced
in the struggle.  It is easier to carve cheese than a good piece of
wood; every piece of wood has a bias, it has to be dealt with on
its own terms, it has to be managed and humoured, but in the end
there is no comparison in quality and interest between carved
cheese and wood–carving.  These are the commonplaces of our
educationists.  But the defence of the work of the Educational
Control is that its repressive measures were aimed not at intrinsic
but at artificial resistances left over from the pre–revolutionary
age.</p><p>In the old world of the early twentieth century there was a vast
amount of crude generalization about what were called "racial"
characteristics.  There were generalizations about arbitrarily
chosen agglomerations of mixed population—the Spanish for example,
or "the West", "Russia", or the Jews; such generalizations were
always unjust and inaccurate and often extremely mischievous.
Nowadays we do not write of races any more, but we recognize groups
of characteristics, evidently transmitted en bloc as a rule by
associated genes, and anthropologists are steadily developing a
scientific classification of human types.  In few aspects do human
beings vary more widely than in their recalcitrance.  It is not a
simple case that some people are more resistant and some less.
There is a wide variation in the life cycle in this respect.
Recalcitrance varies with age and sex.  It varies with diet.  Some
types are obdurate as children but afterwards become more
reasonable.  Some reach a maximum of insubordination in
adolescence.  Generally speaking, passive resistance,
unteachableness and obstinacy, but not insurrectionary energy,
increase rapidly with age.  And in certain populations, of which
the Irish was one, there was a powerful access of resistance after
adolescence in the male.  It rose to the level of absolute
refractoriness.</p><p>Now the apologists for the "persecutions" of the Air Dictatorship
maintain that its missionary teachers were already quite prepared
with the sympathy and finesse needed to teach every type of human
being they would encounter in the world.  So long as resistance was
personal between teacher and learner they welcomed it.  At least
they said they welcomed it.  But when it came to the systematic
organization of young people who would otherwise have had
indifferent minds, so as to present a mass resistance and
subversive opposition to the world order, the Educational Control,
it is argued, was justified in hindering and suppressing books,
meetings, teachings, agitations.  It had the whip hand, and it
would have been a sin not to have made use of that advantage.  "We
do not suppress individuality; we do not destroy freedom; we
destroy obsessions and remove temptations.  The world is still full
of misleading doctrines, dangerous imitations and treacherous
suggestions, and it is the duty of government to erase these"; so
ran the uncompromising memorandum issued by the Educational Council
in 2017.</p><p>"We have to get a common vision of existence, a common idea of
right and wrong, established throughout the whole population of the
world, and SPEEDILY," this memorandum declares.  "Natural instinct
is no help in a labyrinth of artificialities.  It has to be
supplemented by either training or discipline.  The better we
train, the less need for oppression; the more thoroughly we crush
out false presentations and agitations, the more freely, as well as
safely, men can live.  Things are rushing back headlong to
prosperity, and we cannot face abundance and leisure with the
present morale of the race.  It has to be stiffened up; it has to
be drilled to keep ranks."</p><p>In 1955 humanity was suffering throughout the globe from disorder,
famine and pestilence; its numbers were declining, and it might
well have been supposed that it was driving towards extinction.
The change of fortune was swift beyond precedent.  As early as 2017
we have this clear intimation that its guides and rulers were
contemplating the advance of plenty and an excess of leisure with
terror.</p><p>EDITOR'S NOTE</p><p>I think that it may make things clearer for the reader here if I
give a compact summary of the political forms assumed by the
developing world government between 1965 and 2106.  The writer of
this history of Raven's, writing for his contemporaries, assumed
them to be familiar with many institutions for which the readers of
this book will be altogether unprepared.  Fortunately the relations
of the Communist and Fascist Parties to their respective
governments give us a helpful parallel to the relations to the
World Council, the actual world government after 1965, of what was
called the Modern State Movement.  It was its incentive and its
conscience.</p><p>The political structure of the world developed in this fashion:</p><p>After the chaos of the war (1940–50) and the subsequent pestilence
and "social fragmentation" (1950–60) there arose, among other
attempts to again reconstitute a larger society, a combine of the
surviving aviators and the men employed upon the ground plant of
their trade and transport.  This combine was called The Transport
Union.  It does not appear to have realized its full potentialities
in the beginning, in spite of the forecasts of De Windt.</p><p>It initiated various conferences of technicians and at last one in
1965, when it was reorganized as The Air and Sea Control and
produced as subsidiary organs The Supply Control, The Transport
(and Trading) Control, an Educational and Advertisement Control and
other Controls which varied from time to time.</p><p>It was this Air and Sea Control which ultimately gave rise in 1978
at the Second Conference of Basra to the World Council.  This was
the first declared and formal supreme government of the world.  The
Air and Sea Control then disappeared, but its subordinate Controls
remained, and coalesced and multiplied as ministries do in existing
governments, under the supreme direction of the World Council.</p><p>There was no further change in essential political structure
between 1978 and 2059, but there was a great change in the spirit
and method of that supreme government, the World Council.  A new
type of administrator grew up, harder, more devoted and more
resolute than the extremely various men of the two Basra
Conferences.  These younger men constituted what our historian
calls here the Second Council, though it was continuous with the
first.  There was a struggle for power involving the deaths of
several of the earlier councillors, but no formal change of régime;
there continued to be a World Council constituting the supreme
government of the world.  This Second Council is also referred to
as the Air Dictatorship in its earlier years, and later on as the
Puritan Tyranny.  These are not exact constitutional terms but
loose descriptive phrases.  The membership of the World Council
changed by individuals coming and going, but its character remained
singularly uniform for over forty years.  It grew more elderly in
spite of a few youthful accessions.  In 2045 its average age was
61.</p><p>This Second World Council endured until a Conference at Mégève in
Savoy (2059) reconstituted the world government on lines which are
drawn out fairly plainly in the following chapters.</p><p>And now for the relations of this series of governing bodies to the
World–State Movement.</p><p>The ideological developments that inspired these changes were
initiated by a group of writers of whom De Windt was the
outstanding figure.  He built up the project for a world–state in
all its essentials in a book on Social Nucleation published in
1942.  The intrinsic quality of this book has been entirely
overshadowed by its importance as a datum point in history.  It is
a slow laborious book.</p><p>It was the seed of the Modern State Movement which furnished the
plans of the Air and Sea Control.  The Modern State Movement was
never a formally constituted government nor anything in the nature
of a public administration; it was the propaganda and development
of a system of ideas, and this system of ideas produced its own
forms of government.  The "Movement" was initially a propaganda and
research, and then a propaganda, research, and educational
organization.  Its active full members were called Fellows; it had
a class of dormant members, whose relationship to the active
category varied under different conditions and at different
periods; and it had a class of neophytes or apprentices, as
numerous or more numerous than its active Fellows.  It ultimately
incorporated the mass of adult mankind (and womankind) in its
Fellowship.</p><p>It was never divided up into regional bodies.  Its Fellows were
acceptable at any local centre they happened to visit.  Naturally
it began mainly as localized nuclei, but those localizations were
merely for convenience of propaganda, teaching, and local purposes.
The effective subdivision of the Fellowship was into FACULTIES, and
these again were subdivided into sections and departments.  There
was to begin with a faculty of scientific research, a faculty of
interpretation and education, a health faculty, a faculty of social
order, a supply and trading faculty, a number of productive
faculties, agricultural, mineral and so on.  There were splits and
coalescences among these faculties.  Their splits and coalescences
had a frequent relationship to the splits and coalescences of the
Controls, because it was obviously a mental convenience for a
faculty or faculties to correspond with one or more Controls.</p><p>The faculties and their subdivisions, their sections and
departments, possessed electoral central councils, but there never
seems to have been a general directorate of the Modern State
Movement after the early days in which it was one simple system of
propaganda and enquiry nuclei; its nuclei almost from the outset
differentiated naturally into faculties, each viewing human affairs
from its own angle; the movement as a whole did not require a
continuing directive council; there were only conferences when
concerted action between diverse faculties was desirable.</p><p>There never seems to have been any difficulty in the way of a man
or woman belonging to two or more faculties at the same time, and
this greatly facilitated the melting of one faculty into another.
The Modern State Movement was an "open order" attack on social
structures; it was a solvent and not a mould.  The moulds were the
Controls.</p><p>The faculties and their sections, departments, and so forth
developed very unequally; some dwindled to insignificance, and some
on the other hand grew to unanticipated proportions and created
their own distinctive organization and machinery.  This was
particularly the case with the social psychology department of the
faculty of science, which annexed the whole faculty of training and
advertisement by a sheer community of subject.  This social
psychology department of the faculty of science was given the legal
and responsible direction of the Educational Control.</p><p>This body of social psychologists and their associates became a
great critical and disciplinary organism side by side with the
World Council, which ultimately, as will be explained in the
following chapters, it superseded.</p><p>The world then ceased, it seems, to have any single permanent
government at all.  It remained under a series of primary Controls
dealing with each other by the method of conference, namely the
Controls of transport, natural products, staple manufactures,
population (housing and increase), social sanitation (police and
medicine), education (these two latter were later merged as the
Behaviour Control), and the ever expanding activities of scientific
research and creative work.  So the world which had once been
divided among territorial Great Powers became divided among
functional Great Powers.</p><p>Later a Bureau of Reconciliation and Cooperation seems to have
grown up, which decided upon the necessity and method of inter–
Control conferences.  It was something rather in the nature of a
Supreme Court than of a ruling council.</p><p>Most of the old faculties of the Modern State Movement dissolved
into technical organizations under these Controls, with the one
exception of that former department of the science faculty the
department of social psychology, which by 2106 had become, so to
speak, the whole literature, philosophy, and general thought of the
world.  It was the surviving vital faculty of the Modern State
Movement, the reasoning soul in the body of the race.</p><p>In the end it becomes something like what the early nineteenth
century used to think existed under the name of Public Opinion, the
consensus of active thought and imagination throughout the world.
It is plain that by 2106 this rule by a pervasive intelligence had
become an unchallenged success.  It was all that was left by way of
King, President, or Supreme government on earth.</p><p>This assembling and clearing–up of statements which are otherwise
scattered rather perplexingly through the text under consideration
will not, I hope, annoy such readers as have already grasped what I
have summarized here.  I will now return to that text itself.</p></section><footer/></body></html>