<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>2: Keying Up the Planet</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch05s01.xhtml" title="1: Monday Morning in the Creation of a New World"/><link rel="next" href="ch05s03.xhtml" title="3: Geogonic Planning"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="2: Keying Up the Planet" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268641361700"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">2: Keying Up the Planet</h2></div></div></div><p>It had long been known that the vegetation of earth and sea, on
which the volume and vigour of all other life depends, was not
nearly commensurate with the available moisture and sunlight.  As
early as the nineteen thirties it was being pointed out by an
English economic botanist, Frederick Keeble (1870–1975, Collective
Works in the Science section of the Reprints), that there were
delays and arrests in the multiplication of diatoms, seasonal grass
crops, and other extensive primary vegetable growths, arrests due
to the fact that while all other conditions were favourable the
supply of assimilable nitrogen was too slow to keep up the growth
process.  He applied the agricultural lesson of manuring to the
whole spectacle of life and insisted that we were living in a
"nitrogen–starved world".  Nitrogen is yielded up by the inorganic
world to the uses of life with extreme reluctance.  This
observation of Keeble's threw a new light for most people on the
alleged bounty of nature.  Other workers in the same field spread
their observations to other elements.  Carlos Metom (1927–2014), in
a striking passage, compared life on our planet to "a starveling
foal on a barren patch that has never learnt to look for green
pasture".</p><p>This fundamental poverty of terrestrial existence can be traced
through most of the geological record.  Life has been a stinted
thing.  There were a few periods of exuberance, the period of the
Coal Measures for example, when life seemed really to pour upward;
but for most of recorded time life nibbled round the outside of a
ball of limitless mineral wealth to which it had no key.  No
individual intelligence could ever penetrate that hidden hoard of
plenty.  It was only when the collective mentality of Science had
arisen and was going on deathlessly from one clarification to
another that a far more abundant vegetable basis for animal and
human existence came within the range of possibility, and only now
that the waste of human energy in warfare and uncoordinated trading
and money–getting was at an end for ever, that the realization of
that possibility could be attempted.  But hundreds of thousands of
brains are now alight with the prospect of evoking such a plenty
and wealth of life on our planet as the whole universe had never
dreamed of before this time.</p><p>The Second Council, in the beginning of its long reign, had not a
sufficient knowledge of the latent powers of applied biology to
anticipate this fundamental enrichment of life.  It conceived its
rôle to be the working–out of the logical consequences of
mechanical invention during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
The greatest of these consequences were the abolition of distance
and the supersession of toil by power machinery.  The goal of the
Council was to confirm and establish human unity for ever, and to
set up a frame of progressive public activities that should provide
universal employment and universal purchasing power in the face of
a continually increasing industrial efficiency.  At first it was
preoccupied by the persecuting activities that were needed to
secure the world against any reaction towards private monopolization,
romantic nationalism, religious eccentricism, and social fission.
Then, as its success in this direction passed beyond challenge, as
the world community was plainly assured, it found itself confronted
by an ever more portentous problem of leisure.</p><p>It seemed a natural outlet for the surplus of human energy to
provide among other things for an enormous development of
scientific research and an exploration of the deeper mineral
resources of the earth's crust.  The Council assigned something
like a third of the resources available for science to biological
work, and it does not seem to have occurred to these rulers of the
world, preoccupied as they were with the suppression, the excessive
suppression, the obliteration even, of deleterious and antiquated
separatist doctrines and the refashioning of economic life, that
this huge growth of biological enquiry would result in anything
more than the extinction of plant and animal diseases, and
improvements and economies in cultivation.  It was outside the
range of their imaginations to anticipate a spate of biological
invention that put the spate of mechanical invention which
revolutionized the conditions of human life in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries altogether in the shade.  Biological knowledge
outgrew them just as æsthetic sensibility outgrew them.</p><p>From the thirties of the twenty–first century onward the
conservatism of the Second Council had held back an increasing
amount of scientific discoveries from practical application.  The
world was unified; it was supporting its population (which was
being kept well below the modest safety line of 2000 million) with
absolute ease; its health was at a higher level than nature had
ever known before; and it was, so far as the powers in being could
manage it, marking time.  It was like an adolescent who is still
treated as a child.  Even the new possibilities of exuberant
vegetation were not being released.  The areas needed for food
supply could have been halved before 2050, but the Council decided
that the consequent dislocation of the population would be likely
to strain social order, and it kept four or five million people at
the healthy but not very entertaining work of agricultural
production, while it promoted enquiries for the "industrial
application of marginal excesses of foodstuffs".  It was not only
producing, but distributing, staples in 2050 on precisely the lines
adopted in 2020.  It was restraining educational developments and
innovations in building.  It had made the world safe for humanity,
and it meant to keep the world at that.</p><p>In 2047 Homer Lee Pabst published his remarkable researches on the
effect upon chromosomes of certain gases derived from the old
Sterilizing Inhalation made from Permanent Death Gas.  These gases
are known now as Pabst's Kinetogens, and there is a whole series of
them.  Their general effect is to produce mutations of various
types.  They bring about, abundantly and controllably, a
variability in life which has hitherto been caused only with
comparative rarity by cosmic radiations.  By 2050 the biological
world was confronted by a score of absolutely new species of plants
and—queer first–fruits in the animal world—by two new and very
destructive species of rodent.  The artificial evolution of new
creatures had come within the range of human possibility.</p><p>Limitless possibilities opened before the human imagination.  The
Council gave way to panic.  It saw the world it had taken such
pains to put in order given over to uncontrollable vegetable and
animal monstrosities.  A nightmare of evil weeds and strange beasts
dismayed it.  Even the human type, it realized, was threatened.
The laws restraining experiments upon animals were extended, and
every animal novelty produced by Pabst was to be reported upon and
destroyed.  Plant novelties of decorative or economic value were,
however, to be tolerated.  Within his laboratory and experimental
grounds Pabst ignored these prohibitions, and the faculty of
science increased the endowment of the new experimental genetics.
And now that the Supreme Council could no longer interfere, the
Transport and General Distribution Control, the newly developed
section of the Behaviour Control and the Health Services took up
Pabst's results and arranged a conference (2060) for their proper
exploitation.  A general plan for the directed evolution of life
upon the planet was drawn up, a plan which, with various
amendments, is in operation to this day.</p><p>Most of the "wild beasts" of our ancestors are now under control in
their special enclosures and reservations.  There are fifteen Major
Parks of over five hundred square miles in which various specially
interesting faunas and floras flourish without human interference,
except for the occasional passage of some qualified observer on
foot or the transit of a specially licensed aeroplane overhead.
Adventurous holiday–makers are excluded.  The creatures in these
areas are less affected by man than were their predecessors.  They
form a valuable reserve control of the genetic tentatives that are
being made upon their more or less captive brethren.  The most
startling result of these experiments is Dumoric's claim to have
restored, by means of carefully bred crosses and the cultivation of
atavistic types, extinct ancestral forms of the fallow deer.</p><p>One beneficial result of the preoccupation of the Second Council
with the problem of employment for idle hands and minds had
been the very great advances made in both mineralogical and
meteorological science.  It did not realize that the systematic
observation of winds and rainfall could possibly upset its orderly
world.  Indeed, the prospect of forbidding the wind to blow where
it listed was entirely after the Council's heart.  So, too, the
possibility of controlling or drying up volcanoes and earthquakes
appealed very strongly to it.  Before 2000, man's knowledge of the
composition of what he used to call the earth's "crust" and
the mineral resources of the planet beneath that crust was
extraordinarily superficial.  Geologists relied almost entirely for
their knowledge upon surface features, chance exposures, and
industrial excavations.  But the ever increasing resources
available for research made a systematic probing and exploration of
the deeper layers increasingly possible.  The student will find in
any contemporary textbook of Geology an account of the series of
beautiful contrivances such as the Shansi borer, the Hull and
Watkins "diviner," and the Noguchi petrograph, which have now made,
so to speak, hidden things visible to a depth of twenty–five miles,
and there too he will find a description of a score of ingenious
devices for isolating blocks of deep–lying rock and bringing their
desirable ingredients to the surface.  Until a hundred years ago
nothing of this sort was even imagined.  Instead of employing the
energy imprisoned underground to drive what was needed to the
surface, the scanty product of the old–world mines was HAULED up by
human or mechanical power from above and the ores and coal and salt
were actually hewn out in situ by hordes of sweating underpaid
human beings.</p><p>Equally rapid was the progress of meteorology once the Second
Council gave its mind to that subject.  Practical meteorology was
of very recent date.  Except for a little work with the barometer
from 1643 onward, forecasting began only in the nineteenth century
and was not systematically attempted until 1850.  An infinitesimal
tampering with the composition of the air began in the early
twentieth century.  Then man found himself able to withdraw
nitrogen from it, but this was done only to provide fertilizers,
and in such small quantities as to make no appreciable effect upon
the composition of the atmosphere.  Little more was attempted until
the last war, when the local use of substances like the so–called
Permanent Death Gas was carried out on a sufficiently big scale to
amount to a transitory readjustment of the air over the region
poisoned.  Then in the thirties of the twenty–first century there
was an extensive use of gas on a large scale to destroy locusts,
rodents, and various insect pests.  Considerable enthusiasm was
shown at the time, but one or two unfortunate accidents cooled the
zeal of the Council.  It was realized that air–mixing for anything
but stimulating and purifying purposes must wait upon the
achievement of wind control.  Air–mixing was put back into the
pigeonholes with a gathering number of other gifts from science
that the Council deemed premature.</p><p>The Joint Commission for replanning the world found itself
therefore with three correlated groups of possibility challenging
its spirit of adventure.  A new flora of several thousand species
was awaiting release from the experimental grounds, and this was
only the easiest of the apparently limitless possibilities of
animal and vegetable variation that experimental biology was taking
up.  A huge and hitherto unsuspected wealth of mineral substances
was ready to come out of the deep–lying rocks and refresh the
rather limited and jaded resources of the contemporary soil.  And
alterations in the composition and movements of the atmosphere were
no longer inaccessibly beyond human effort.  The obstruction of
individual ownership and localized governments had been swept away
for ever.  In that respect the Second Council had beyond question
triumphed.  But the very vigour with which it had done its task for
man and the world as they were, and still in effect are, had
cleared the ground for such an unprecedented inventiveness as is
now rapidly altering not only the face but the very substance of
life.</p><p>The Replanning Commission set about its task with the leisurely
energy of a body under no stress of necessity.  "Life is quite good
as it is," runs the Introduction to its Draft Plan.  "But it is
part of the fundamental goodness of life that we have as much
incessant novelty as we desire at our disposal.  Due proportion
must be our perpetual care.  Want of proportion in the development
of new things was the general cause of the great bulk of human
suffering and frustration during the past five centuries.  We have
now an organization of controls that can restrain anything like the
spasmodic mercenary enterprise, without plan or balance, that let
loose disaster in the early twentieth century.  We can afford to
look before we leap and measure within quite close limits the tale
of consequences we set going.  In the end we may find that there
was very considerable justification for the restraint put by our
Supreme Council upon the immediate application of recent
inventions, and particularly of recent biological inventions, which
might otherwise have precipitated very similar but even more
fundamental and catastrophic disproportions to those which
overwhelmed the capitalist civilization of the nineteenth century.</p><p>"The particular field in which we propose a continuation of
restraint is in the application of the rapidly advancing science of
genetics to the increase of variability so far as human beings, and
probably some other of the higher mammals, are concerned.  We
believe that the general feeling of the race is against any such
experimentation at present.  Under the Second Council the painless
destruction of monsters and the more dreadful and pitiful sorts of
defective was legalized, and also the sterilization of various
types that would otherwise have transmitted tendencies that were
plainly undesirable.  This is as far, we think, as humanity should
go in directing its racial heredity, until our knowledge of
behaviour has been greatly amplified.  For an age or so we can be
content with humanity as it now is, humanity no longer distressed
and driven to cruelty by overcrowding, under–nourishment,
infections, mental and physical poisons of every sort.  There is a
rich mine of still greatly underdeveloped capacity in the human
brain as it is, and this we may very happily explore by means of
artistic effort, by scientific investigations, by living freely and
gaily, for the next few generations.  Normal human life can be
cleansed, extended and amplified.  With that we propose to content
ourselves.  Even upon this planet we have millions of years ahead
before there can be any fundamental change in our environment.</p><p>"Directly we turn from humanity to other forms of life it is
manifest that a most attractive realm is opening to us.  We may
have new and wonderful forests; we may have new plants; we may
replace the weedy and scanty greensward of the past by a subtler
and livelier texture.  Undreamt–of fruits and blossoms may be
summoned out of non–existence.  The insect world, on which so much
of the rest of life depends, may be made more congenial to mankind.
The smaller fry of life and the little beasts and the birds can be
varied now until they all come into a tolerable friendship with
ourselves.  As our hands lose their clumsiness we may interfere
more and more surely with the balance of life.  There is no longer
fear of abundance now that man is sane.</p><p>"Our planning of human activities for the next few generations will
involve no fundamental changes at all for humanity.  It will be a
keying–up of the sort of life for which our race, however darkly,
confusedly and unsuccessfully, has always striven.  At present
deliberate weather–control is too big a task for us, but we believe
that a sure weather calendar for a year or so ahead is now becoming
possible.  An immense series of enterprises to change the soil,
lay–out, vegetation and fauna, first of this region and then of
that, will necessitate a complete rearrangement of the mines, deep
quarries, road network and heavy sea transport of the globe.  None
of this need be ugly or repulsive, even in the doing; it can all be
made intensely interesting.  Engineering structure, which was once
clumsy and monstrous, is now becoming as graceful as a panther.
Industrial enterprises that formerly befouled the world with smoke,
refuse and cinder heaps, are now cleaner in their habits than a
well–trained cat.  The world lay–out of the Second Council,
designed apparently for a static society, will be to a large extent
swept aside by our new operations.  And no doubt our achievements
in their turn will give way to still bolder and lovelier
enterprises."</p><p>So ran the Introduction to what is known as the Keying–up Plan of
2060.  To–day we are most of us still immersed in its realization.
It has given the world occupation without servitude and leisure
without boredom.  When we have had enough of our own work for a
time we fly off—or walk round the corner—to see what other people
are doing.  The world is full of interest and delight, from the
forest gardens of the Amazons with their sloths, monkeys and
occasional pumas and alligators to that playground of the world,
the snowfields of the Himalayas.  We can arrange to take a turn
with the meteorological observers in the upper air, or tune our
lungs for a spell in the deep–sea galleries below the rafts of
Atlantis.  There we can see the great cephalopods of the middle
levels coming for their food or watch the headlong growth of a
giant pearl.</p><p>We are already so accustomed to grace, beauty and variety in all
the details and general forms about us that it is only by turning
over the pictures and records of seventy years ago that we realize
how relatively uneventful were the first decades of human unity.
At first man seems to have been so exhausted by his escape from
massacre, disease, economic waste and general futility, and so
terrified by the thought of any relapse into the old confusions,
conflicts and economic cannibalism, that he was capable of nothing
but order.  But he gathers courage.  It is not only our world that
is being keyed up, but ourselves.</p></section><footer/></body></html>