<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>1: Monday Morning in the Creation of a New World</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch05.xhtml" title="Book the Fifth"/><link rel="next" href="ch05s02.xhtml" title="2: Keying Up the Planet"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="1: Monday Morning in the Creation of a New World" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268641344220"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">1: Monday Morning in the Creation of a New World</h2></div></div></div><p>With the Declaration of Mégève in 2059 C.E. the Age of Frustration,
the opening phase of the Era of the Modern State, came to an end.
Let us recapitulate that history in its barest outline.  The World–
State had appeared dimly and evasively, as an aspiration, as a
remote possibility, as the suggestion of a League of Nations,
during the World War of 1914–18; it had gathered experience and
definition throughout the decades of collapse and disaster; it had
formally invaded human politics at the Conference of Basra in 1965
as manifestly the only possible solution of the human problem, and
now it had completed its conquest of mankind.</p><p>The systematic consolidation of that conquest had begun in earnest
after the Second Conference of Basra in 1978.  Then the World
Council had set itself to certain tasks that had been so
inconceivable hitherto that not the most daring sociologists had
looked them in the face.  They had contented themselves with pious
aspirations, and taken refuge in the persuasion that, if they were
sufficiently disregarded, these tasks would somehow do themselves.
They were tasks of profound mental reconstruction, reconstruction
going deeper into the substratum of the individual life than
anything that had ever been attempted before.  In the first place
traditions of nationality had to be cleared away for good, and
racial prejudice replaced by racial understanding.  This was a
positive job against immense resistances.  Next a lingua–franca had
to be made universal and one or other of the great literature–
bearing languages rendered accessible to everyone.  This again was
not to be done for the wishing.  And thirdly, and most evaded of
all three obstacles that had to be surmounted, issue had to be
joined with the various quasi–universal religious and cultural
systems, Christianity, Jewry, Islam, Buddhism and so forth, which
right up to the close of the twentieth century were still in active
competition with the Modern State movement for the direction of the
individual life and the control of human affairs.  While these
competing cultures remained in being they were bound to become
refuges and rallying–shelters for all the opposition forces that
set themselves to cripple and defeat the new order of the world.</p><p>We have told already how that issue was joined, and shown how
necessary it was to bring all the moral and intellectual training
of the race into direct and simple relations with the Modern State
organization.  After 2020 there is no record of any schools being
open in the world except the Modern State schools.  Christianity
where it remained sacerdotal and intractable was suppressed, but
over large parts of the world it was not so much abolished as
watered down to modernity.  Everywhere its endowments had vanished
in the universal slump; it could find no supply of educated men to
sustain its ministry; the majority of its churches stood neglected
and empty, and when the great rebuilding of the world began most of
them vanished with all the other old edifices that lacked beauty or
interest.  They were cleared away like dead leaves.</p><p>The story of Islam was closely parallel.  It went more readily even
than Christianity because its school organization was weaker.  It
was pinned very closely to the teaching of Arabic.  The decadence
of that language shattered its solidarity much as the disuse of
Latin disintegrated Western Christianity.  It left a few–score
beautiful mosques as Christianity left a few–score beautiful
chapels, churches and cathedrals.  And patterns, legends, memories
remained over in abundance, more gracious and lovely by far than
the realities from which they were distilled.</p><p>There had been a widespread belief in the tenacity and solidarity
of Judaism.  The Jews had been able to keep themselves a people
apart, eating peculiar food and following distinctive religious
practices, a nation within the nation, in every state in the world.
They had been a perpetual irritant to statesmen, a breach in the
collective solidarity everywhere.  They had played a peculiar in–
and–out game of social relationship.  One could never tell whether
a Jew was being a citizen or whether he was being just a Jew.  They
married, they traded preferentially.  They had their own standards
of behaviour.  Wherever they abounded their peculiarities aroused
bitter resentment.</p><p>It might have been supposed that a people so widely dispersed would
have developed a cosmopolitan mentality and formed a convenient
linking organization for many world purposes, but their special
culture of isolation was so intense that this they neither did nor
seemed anxious to attempt.  After the World War the orthodox Jews
played but a poor part in the early attempts to formulate the
Modern State, being far more preoccupied with a dream called
Zionism, the dream of a fantastic independent state all of their
own in Palestine, which according to their Babylonian legend was
the original home of all this synthesis of Semitic–speaking
peoples.  Only a psycho–analyst could begin to tell for what they
wanted this Zionist state.  It emphasized their traditional wilful
separation from the main body of mankind.  It irritated the world
against them, subtly and incurably.</p><p>On another score also the unpopularity of Israel intensified in the
early twentieth century.  The core of the slump process was
manifestly monetary.  Something was profoundly rotten with money
and credit.  The Jews had always had and cultivated the reputation
of a peculiar understanding and cleverness in monetary processes.
Yet in the immense difficulties of that time no authoritative
direction came from the Jews.  The leading minds of the time who
grappled with the intricate problems of monetary reconstruction and
simplification were almost all Gentiles.  It was natural for the
common man to ask, "Where are the Jews?"  It was easy for him to
relapse into suspicion and persecution.  Were they speculating
unobtrusively?  It was an obvious thing for Gentile speculators to
shift suspicion to this race which gloried in and suffered by its
obstinate resolve to remain a "peculiar people".</p><p>And yet between 1940 and 2059, in little more than a century, this
antiquated obdurate culture disappeared.  It and its Zionist state,
its kosher food, the Law and all the rest of its paraphernalia,
were completely merged in the human community.  The Jews were not
suppressed; there was no extermination; there were world–wide
pogroms during the political and social breakdown of the Famished
Fifties, but under the Tyranny there was never any specific
persecution at all; yet they were educated out of their oddity and
racial egotism in little more than three generations.  Their
attention was distracted from Moses and the Promise to Abraham and
the delusion that God made his creation for them alone, and they
were taught the truth about their race.  The world is as full as
ever it was of men and women of Semitic origin, but they belong no
more to "Israel".</p><p>This success—the people of the nineteenth century would have
deemed it a miracle—is explicable because of two things.  The
first of them is that the Modern State revolution was from the
first educational and only secondarily political; it ploughed
deeper than any previous revolution.  And next it came about under
new and more favourable conditions.  In the nineteenth century the
family group had ceased to be the effective nucleus in either
economic or cultural life.  And all the odd exclusiveness of the
Jew had been engendered in his closed and guarded prolific home.
There is an immense collection of fiction written by Jews for Jews
in the early twentieth century, in which the relaxation of this
immemorial close home–training and the clash of the old and
modernizing generations is described.  The dissolution of Israel
was beginning even then.</p><p>The task of making the mind of the next generation had been
abandoned almost unconsciously, for Jew and Gentile alike, to
external influences, and particularly to the newspaper and the
common school.  After 1940 this supersession of home training was
renewed in an extensive form.  The Modern State movement had from
the outset gripped the teachers, re–created popular education after
the dark decades upon its own lines, and arrested every attempt to
revive competing schools.  Even had he desired it the Jew could no
longer be peculiar in the food either of his body or his mind.</p><p>The complete solidarity of mankind in 2059, the disappearance of
the last shadows of dislike and distrust between varied cults,
races, and language groups, witnesses to the profound truth of what
Falaise, one of De Windt's editors, has called the Mental
Conception of History.  The Age of Frustration was essentially an
age of struggle to achieve certain plainly possible things against
the resistances of a muddled human mind.  The Declaration of Mégève
was not simply an assertion of victory and freedom for the race, it
was the demonstration of its achieved lucidity.</p><p>As the curtain of separatist dreams, racial fantasies and hate
nightmares thinned out and passed away, what was presented to that
awakening human brain?  A little sunlit planet, for its external
material, bearing what we now realize is not a tithe of its
possible flora and fauna, a ball crammed with unused and
unsuspected resources; and for the internal stuff of that brain
almost limitless possibilities of mental achievement.  All that had
been done hitherto by man was like the scribbling of a little child
before eye and hand have learnt sufficient co–ordination to draw.
It was like the pawing and crawling of a kitten before it begins to
see.  And now man's eyes were open.</p><p>This little planet of which he was now at last in mentally
untroubled possession was not simply still under–developed and
waste; its surface was everywhere scarred and disfigured by the
long wars he had waged so blindly for its mastery.  Everywhere in
2059 the scenery of the earth still testified to the prolonged war,
the state of siege to establish a unified mastery, that had now
come to an end.  If most of the divisions and barriers of the
period of the sovereign states had disappeared, if there were no
longer castles, fortifications, boundaries and strategic lines to
be traced, there were still many indications that the world was
under control and still not quite sure of its own good behaviour.
The carefully planned system of aerodromes to prevent any untoward
developments of the free private flying that had been tolerated
after 2040 was such an indication, and so was the strategic import
plainly underlying the needlessly wide main roads that left no
possible region of insurrection inaccessible.  From the air or on a
map it was manifest that the world was still "governed".  The road
system was like a net cast over a dangerous beast.</p><p>And equally visible still was the quality of recent conquest in the
social and economic fields.  As Theotocopulos complained, the
Second Council overdid its embankments.  It was distrustful even of
the waters of the earth.  Its reservoirs and rivers had, he says,
"a bullied air".  If the jostling little fields and misshapen ill–
proportioned farms, the untidy mines, refuse–heaps, factories,
workers, slums and hovels and all the dire squalor of competitive
industrialism had long since disappeared from the spectacle, there
was still effort visible at every point in the layout of twenty–
first–century exploitation.  The stripping and burning of forests
that had devastated the world so extensively in the middle decades
of the preceding hundred years had led to strenuous reafforestation.
Strenuous is the word.  "Grow," said the Council, "and let there be
no nonsense about it."  At the end of the Age of Frustration a tree
that was not lined up and lopped and drilled was an exception in the
landscape.</p><p>Everywhere there was still this suggestion of possible insubordination
and the sense of an underlying threat.  Man had struggled
desperately and had won, but it was only now that he was finding
time to consider any but the most immediate and superficial
possibilities of his planet.</p><p>The air–view as the dispersing delegates from Mégève saw it forty–
seven years ago was indeed in the vividest contrast to the world
garden in which we live to–day.  That clumsy rationality, that real
dread of æstheticism, that had haunted the Council to its end, had
made the artificial factors in the landscape inelegant and emphatic
almost without exception.  Bridges and roads "got there", as
Theotocopulos said, "like charging rhinoceroses".  True that the
disposition to squat forms, which came from the age of the air
raids, no longer prevailed, but there was a general tendency to
make buildings too solid and too big; they had sometimes a certain
grandiose boldness, but more often than not there was a touch of
military stupidity in the appearance of their piled–up masses.
They stood to attention.  There was a needlessly lavish abundance
of pylons, and they were generally too sturdy.</p><p>The enrichment of vegetation which is now world–wide was in
operation at that time only in a few experimental areas; in most
regions there was still hardly more forest or cultivation than had
existed a century and a half before.  If the devastation of
fellings and fires during the last wars had been replaced by the
new straight–ruled, squared–out forests, there was as yet no
perceptible rise in the level of the plant community anywhere; what
had previously been forest was plantation or forest again, and what
had been prairie was still prairie, differing only from the grass
prairies of older days in the dwindling contingent of weeds and
wild flowers.  In spite of the self–complacency of the forestry
department of that time, many trees distorted by disease survived,
and most were by our standards stunted.  To young eyes to–day this
world of our fathers, as they see it in picture book and panorama,
has not merely a regimented but a barren look, and its cultivation
seems laborious and poor.</p><p>Yet compared with the landscape of two centuries ago its aspect was
relatively prosperous, spacious and orderly.  There is something
very touching in the freely expressed response of the nineteenth–
century folk to both urban and country landscape and to natural
scenery generally.  They did not dream how meagre their descendants
were to find the spectacle before them.  They had, at any rate, as
good cloudscapes and sunsets as we have, and such natural coast
scenery as that of Western Scotland was practically the same then
as it is to–day.  They would endure irksome travel to see sunlit
snowy mountain masses or get to some viewpoint that caught the
rhythm of a distant chain.  They loved water and woodlands and
distant fields in a wide view, and towns they admired chiefly as
piled up accumulations seen from a distance.  Also they delighted
very greatly in the close brightness of flowering hedges, sheets of
bluebells, primrose rides, green moss and tendrils and any sort of
flower.  They pick these things out for appreciation so
persistently in their literature and paintings that it is only with
an effort we realize how much they were "picked out", and how dull
and repetitive were endless miles of their normal roads and
countryside and how flatly forbidding the ordinary aspects of their
habitations.</p><p>So far as we can reconstruct it now the prevalent note of the
nineteenth century scene was weak insipidity, degenerating very
easily into a distressful mean ungainliness.  America was
frostbitten in the north and slovenly in the south and unkempt
everywhere.  Happily the shorter–lived, not very healthy or
vigorous folk of these days had no standards of comparison, and
actual intimations of discontent with nature and the countryside
were rare.  There is scarcely an admission in nineteenth–century
literature that the larger part of the natural world was gaunt,
unsatisfactory and utterly unsympathetic.  Writers and poets did
not dare to admit as much because they had neither the hope nor the
energy to make things better.  They would not see it in obedience
to an elementary psychological law.</p><p>But under the Second Council, the criticism not only of man's
achievement but of natural insufficiency had become voluminous
because neither was felt any longer to be final.  It was not only
the heavy engineering, the massive buildings and the over–emphasied
roadways that those returning delegates threatened with their
minds.  Much of the land was still unsettled.  They looked down on
areas of marsh and scrub, bare wildernesses of rock, rainless
regions, screes and avalanche slopes.  For them as for us it was a
world of promise still to be fulfilled.</p><p>"Now we can begin on all this," they said.  "Now we have really to
begin."</p></section><footer/></body></html>