<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>9: A New Phase in the History of Life</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch05s08.xhtml" title="8: Sublimation of Interest"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="9: A New Phase in the History of Life" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268641420700"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">9: A New Phase in the History of Life</h2></div></div></div><p>From the point of view of the ecologist the establishment of the
Modern State marks an epoch in biological history.  It has been an
adaptation, none too soon, of our species to changing conditions
that must otherwise have destroyed it.  The immense developments
and disasters of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries show us
mankind scrambling on the verge of irreparable disaster.</p><p>The infinite toil of millions of tormented brains, the devotion and
persistence of countless forgotten devotees, gave form and clear
purpose in time to what were at first mere flounderings and
clutchings towards safety.  The threatened race did not fall back
into that abyss of extinction which has swallowed up so many of the
bolder experiments of life.  In pain and uncertainty it clambered
past its supreme danger phase, and now it has struggled to such a
level of assurance, understanding and safety as no living substance
has ever attained before.</p><p>By means of education and social discipline the normal human
individual today acquires characteristics without which his
continued existence would be impossible.  In the future, as the
obscurer processes of selection are accelerated and directed by
eugenic effort, these acquired characteristics will be incorporated
with his inherent nature, and his educational energy will be
released for further adaptations.  He will become generation by
generation a new species, differing more widely from that weedy,
tragic, pathetic, cruel, fantastic, absurd and sometimes sheerly
horrible being who christened himself in a mood of oafish arrogance
Homo sapiens.</p><p>The differences of the coming man from the man of the past will be
multitudinous and intricate, but certain broad lines of comparison
appear already.  We have noted already the difference in the age
cycle between ourselves and our ancestors, which has prolonged the
youthful phase and shifted on the valid years towards the thirty–
five to eighty period, and we have cited also the completer
physical development, due to the release of vital energy from the
task of resisting various infections, poisons and morbidities of
growth.  We are probably only in the beginning of very much more
considerable physical modification.  The æsthetic ideals of the
past are likely to play a large part in determining the direction
in which these modifications will take us.  But these physical
developments, important though they must ultimately be, are as yet
much less important than the changes in moral form that are
manifestly in progress.  A brief consideration of these will make a
fitting conclusion to this general outline of history.</p><p>Essentially they constitute a readjustment of the individual to the
racial life.  When we go back in time for a million years or so we
find our ancestor species in a phase of almost fundamental
individualism.  Except where sexual life and the instinct system to
protect offspring came in, the subman shifted for himself.  He had
no associates in the food hunt, no allies for defence.  He was as
solitary an animal as the tiger.  From that he passed through
stages of increasing sociability.  The onset of these stages was
made practicable by the retention of immature characteristics into
adult life.  The same thing is happening to the remnant of the
lions today.  They remain cubbish and friendly now to a much later
age than they did a few–score thousand years ago.  Man passed
through a stage when he was as sociable as a modern lion and on to
a phase when he was as sociable as a wolf or hunting dog.</p><p>But he did not rest at that.  All the conditions of his life
favoured the formation of still–larger communities and still–closer
interdependence.  He became a cultivator, an economic animal, and
his communities expanded to thousands and scores of thousands of
individuals held together by mutual service.  He produced language
and religion to bind the will and activities of these aggregations
into an effective common policy.  The history of mankind, as we
unfold it to the contemporary student, is a story of ever
increasing communication and ever increasing interdependence.
Insensibly the material side of individual freedom was modified
into unavoidable cooperation with the community.</p><p>Stress must be laid upon that word material.  The physical
subjugation and socialization of the human animal far outran his
moral subjection.  The history of mankind is also a history of
education and compulsion.  It is a record of give and take.  Man
almost up to the present day has remained at heart still the early
savage, caring only for himself, for his sexual life, and, during
the few years of their helplessness, his children.  He has been
willing to associate for aggression or for defence, but only very
reluctantly for a common happiness.  He has had to barter his
freedom for the advantages of collective action, but he has done so
against the grain, needing persuasion, pressure and helpful
delusions.</p><p>The history of mankind has had to be very largely the history
of a succession of religious and emotional inventions and
reconstructions, to override the inherent distaste in the
individual for subordination and self–sacrifice.  At every
opportunity the individual has sought to recover its personal
initiatives.  Its egotism has battled instinctively of necessity to
get the best of the bargain and receive with as little giving as
possible.</p><p>Man's natural self struggles to do that now as strongly as
ever he did.  But he struggles now in a better light and more
intelligently; he realizes what is impossible, and the long
conflict of individualism with society has arrived at a rational
compromise.  We have learnt how to catch and domesticate the ego at
an early stage and train it for purposes greater than itself.</p><p>What has happened during the past three and a half centuries to the
human consciousness has been a sublimation of individuality.  That
phase is the quintessence of modern history.  A large part of the
commonplace life of man, the food–hunt, the shelter–hunt, the
safety–hunt, has been lifted out of the individual sphere and
socialized for ever.  To that the human egotism has given its
assent perforce.  It has abandoned gambling and profit–seeking and
all the wilder claims of property.  It has ceased altogether to
snatch, scramble and oust for material ends.  And the common man
has also been deprived of any weapons for his ready combativeness
and of any liberty in its release.  Nowadays even children do not
fight each other.  Gentleness in difference has become our second
nature.</p><p>All that part of man's life and interests has been socialized
entirely against his natural disposition in the matter.  In all
those concerns the whole race is now confluent; it is becoming as
much a colonial organism as any branching coral or polyp, though
the ties that link us are not fleshly bands, but infinitely elastic
and invisible and subtle.  In the later chapters of this world
history we have examined and displayed, with particular attention
because of its culminating character, the essential individualism
of the World War process, and we have told how, with what
difficulty and after what scourgings, our race has been brought to
its present phase of organized self–control.  This present phase is
the victory of creative power working through the individualities
of a more intelligent minority, in the face of universal confusion,
taking indeed advantage of that confusion to inaugurate our present
order.  That wilful minority has opened the gates to a power and
abundance of existence beyond all former dreaming.  But our Modern
State has neither absorbed nor destroyed individuality, which
now, accepting the necessary restrictions upon its material
aggressiveness, resumes at every opportunity its freedom and
enterprise upon a higher level of life.</p><p>The individuality deprived, or relieved if you will, of its primary
instinctive preoccupations with getting and keeping, disillusioned
about precedence, personal display and suchlike barbaric vanities,
growing continually and swiftly in wisdom and knowledge, has now to
go further afield to find itself.  No longer a self–sufficient
being, at war with all its kind, it has become a responsible part
of a species.  It has become an experiment in feeling, knowing,
making and response.</p><p>The body of mankind is now one single organism of nearly two
thousand five hundred million persons, and the individual
differences of every one of these persons is like an exploring
tentacle thrust out to test and learn, to savour life in its
fullness and bring in new experiences for the common stock.  We are
all members of one body.<a href="#ftn.idp140532888757104" class="footnote"><sup class="footnote" id="idp140532888757104">[2]</sup></a>  Only in the dimmest analogy has anything
of this sort happened in the universe as we knew it before.  Our
sense of our individual difference makes our realization of our
common being more acute.  We work, we think, we explore, we
dispute, we take risks and suffer—for there seems no end to the
difficult and dangerous adventures individual men and women may
attempt; and more and more plain does it become to us that it is
not our little selves, but Man the Undying who achieves these
things through us.</p><p>As the slower processes of heredity seize upon and confirm these
social adaptations, as the confluence of wills supersedes
individual motives and loses its present factors of artificiality,
the history of life will pass into a new phase, a phase with a
common consciousness and a common will.  We in our time are still
rising towards the crest of that transition.  And when that crest
is attained what grandeur of life may not open out to Man!  Eye
hath not seen, nor ear heard; nor hath it entered into the mind of
man to conceive….  For now we see as in a glass darkly….</p><p>At this point Raven's copied–out manuscript comes to an end—it
seems to me a little abruptly.  But it is the end; he has written
the word "Finis" here.  I will add only one word or so by way of
comment.  I have called that manuscript a dream book.  Was it a
dream book or was it indeed, as he declared and believed it to be,
a vision of the shape of things to come?  Or—there is a third
possibility.  As dreaming, this book is far too coherent; as
vision, incredulity creeps in.  But was Raven, too busily employed
and too obsessed by the sense of urgency to embark upon a detailed
analysis of world development, was he trying nevertheless to sketch
out in this fantastic form a general thesis at least about the
condition of things to come?  If this is neither a dream book nor a
Sibylline history, then it is a theory of world revolution.
Plainly the thesis is that history must now continue to be a string
of accidents with an increasingly disastrous trend until a
comprehensive faith in the modernized World–State, socialistic,
cosmopolitan and creative, takes hold of the human imagination.
When the existing governments and ruling theories of life, the
decaying religious and the decaying political forms of to–day, have
sufficiently lost prestige through failure and catastrophe, then
and then only will world–wide reconstruction be possible.  And it
must needs be the work, first of all, of an aggressive order of
religiously devoted men and women who will try out and establish
and impose a new pattern of living upon our race.</p><div class="footnotes" epub:type="footnotes"><br/><hr class="footnote-hr"/><div id="ftn.idp140532888757104" class="footnote" epub:type="footnote"><p><a href="#idp140532888757104" class="para"><sup class="para">[2] </sup></a>This was the phrase of that interesting mystic St. Paul (Saul) of
Tarsus (2–62 C.E.  Epistles with analysis and commentary by Hirsch
and Potter in the Historical Reprints: Development of Ideas
Series), who did so much to pervert and enlarge the simpler
cosmopolitan fraternalism of Jesus of Nazareth (–4–30 C.E.)
before it was finally overwhelmed and lost in the sacrificial
sacerdotalism of formal Christianity.  For a brief period before it
relapsed the Pauline cult had a curious flavour of Modern State
feeling.  There was, however, a politic disingenuousness in Paul
which betrayed his undeniable intellectual power.  He was ambiguous
about blood sacrifices, immortality, private property and slavery,
to the eternal injury of the Christian movement.  It was completely
prostituted to usage before the first century was over.  See Ivan
Mackenzie, General Elements of Religion 2103.  Mackenzie has an
excellent chapter on the anticipation of Modern State ideas by
ancient writers, and is particularly interesting on the Superior
Person (Generalized or Super Man) of Confucius (551–478 B.C.) and
the City of God of St. Augustine (354–430).</p></div></div></section><footer/></body></html>