<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>5: Organization of Plenty</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch05s04.xhtml" title="4: Changes in the Control of Behaviour"/><link rel="next" href="ch05s06.xhtml" title="6: The Average Man Grows Older and Wiser"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="5: Organization of Plenty" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268641394320"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">5: Organization of Plenty</h2></div></div></div><p>Just as it becomes increasingly difficult for the teacher of
history to convey to each new generation what human feelings and
motives were like in a world of morbid infections and unwholesome
bodily habits or in a heavily sentimentalized atmosphere of general
distrust and insecurity, so also he has to make a most vigorous
imaginative effort to recover even the faintest shadow of the
pervading vexation, humiliations and straining anxiety that
resulted from an almost universal deficiency of common things.
Everybody, except a small minority, went short until the close of
the twentieth century.  Even the rich had to be wary cunning buyers
to satisfy all their fancies and desires.  The simplified economic
order of our world to–day runs so smoothly that we hardly think at
all about our ordinary needs.  Housing, food and clothing wait upon
us wherever we go.  It is so easily done that we fail to realize
the immense cleansing away of obstructive difficulties that had to
occur before it could be made so easy.</p><p>One of the results of abundance that our ancestors would have found
paradoxical is the abolition of encumbrance.  But the less there
was in the past the more you had to have and hold.  Men had to
appropriate things because there was not enough to go round.  Your
home was not simply the place to which you retired for solitude or
intimacy; it was a store house.  In the sixteenth or seventeenth
century it was even fortified by bars, locks and bolts against
robbers.  You got with difficulty, and what you got you kept.  The
successful man of those days was imprisoned and smothered in
accumulations upon which he dared not relax his watchfulness and
grip.  They were as indestructible as he could make them, for once
destroyed or ignored they might prove irreplaceable.  Everybody was
keeping things, keeping them rather than using them.  If they were
not wanted now they might be wanted presently.  If that successful
man desired to vary his urban life he had to possess a country
house.  In these establishments there had to be a miniature social
economy.  Much of the food was not only prepared in the personal
household, but produced on the private estate.  All this had to be
managed and watched to prevent waste, slackness and dishonesty.
All the clothes the prosperous man might want to wear had to be
stored and preserved in presses and wardrobes; his household needed
gear against any possible emergency; and all his accumulations had
to be guarded against robbers.  It was almost as anxious and
wearing a job to be rich as to be poor in those days of general
insufficiency.  And if the rich man travelled, he had to travel in
his own coach with his attendants, taking a great burthen of
clothing and general luggage with him.</p><p>In the relatively plentiful days of the later nineteenth century,
which in so many details foreshadowed and yet failed to complete
and generalize the conditions of our own time, there was for the
prosperous at least a certain alleviation of the burthen of
property.  The temporary achievement of a limited cosmopolitanism
of money and credit, the multiplication of the bourgeoisie, the
liquidation of ownership by joint–stock undertakings, the increased
facilities for communication and movement, made successful people
less disposed to sit down amidst their possessions.  There was a
sustained general effort, which we now find grotesque and
irrational, to keep property and at the same time not to be
bothered by property.  The ideal of success was no longer concrete
ownership but purchasing power.  Houses, furnishings and so forth
changed hands with increased readiness.</p><p>Instead of living in great complete houses and dining at home,
people lived in smaller houses or flats and dined in collective
dining–rooms or restaurants.  They gave up having country houses of
their own and travelled freely and variously, evoking a vast
industry of hotels and hired villas.  They travelled lighter—in
comparison with preceding centuries, that is.  As retail trade
organized itself upon big–business lines, the need for the private
storage of gear diminished.  People bought things when they wanted
them, because now they could do so.  The big "stores" of the early
twentieth century carried an enormous and greatly varied stock.</p><p>In the days of Shakespeare new clothes, new furniture, new houses,
new things of all sorts were infrequent; in the early twentieth
century there were already intimations of the general fresh newness
of our own times.  The facilities for scrapping were still poorly
developed, and there was much congestion and endless litter about,
but renewal and replacement for those who had purchasing power were
already well developed.  If it had not been for the social
catastrophe due to ignorance, individualism, monetary deflation and
nationalism that overwhelmed that phase of civilization, the
distributing organization of the world might very probably have
developed straight on from the system of linked stores as it
flourished in America in 1925 to our present conditions.  And
similarly there was an expansion of hotel life and a belated
beginning of portable country houses, clearly foreshadowing our
current arrangements.</p><p>After the disasters and new beginnings of the middle decades of the
twentieth century it was to the patterns of big business at the
close of the First Age of Abundance that the direction of the
Transport Union recurred.  We have told how easily and necessarily
that Union became the trading monopoly and finally, as the Air and
Sea Control, the actual government of the renascent world.  Its
counting–houses issuing and receiving its energy notes became the
New Banking; its Trading Council became the New Retailing; its
Supply Control took over, at last, the productive activities of the
world.  From the first the new powers were instinct with the idea
of mobility.  They had no vestiges in their composition of the
skimping and saving traditions of the ages of insufficiency.  They
set about providing as ample and various accommodation for
everybody as the ever–increasing production of the planet
permitted.</p><p>The great distributing stores of the previous age provided the
patterns from which the new distribution developed in that age of
recovery.  Wherever old towns and cities were being reconstructed
or new ones appearing about new centres of productive activity the
architects of the Air and Sea Control erected their great
establishments, at first big and handsome after the old fashion and
then more finely planned.  At first these stores sold things
according to the old method, then gradually in regard to a number
of things, to clothing for example, they organized the modern
system of exchanging new things for old; the new shoes or garment
would be made and fitted to the customer and the old taken away and
pulped or otherwise disposed of.  Nothing is cobbled nowadays;
nothing is patched or repaired.  By degrees this method abolished
that ancient institution the laundry altogether.  That line of
fluttering patched and tattered garments so characteristic of old–
world village scenery vanished from the earth.  New rapid methods
of measuring and fitting replaced the tape, scissors and sewing of
the old days.  In the time of the Hoover Slump men would wear their
underclothes for years, having them painfully washed out, dried,
ironed and returned weekly, and they would wear their complex outer
garments with all the old fastenings, buttons, straps, buckles and
so forth, sometimes for many years.  They had to be made of dark
fabrics with broken patterns to conceal their griminess.  The
clothing of the Middle Ages was still filthier.  Nowadays the
average life of our much simpler and brighter outer garments with
their convenient zip fastenings is about a week, and such light
underclothes as we wear last about three days.  We keep no
wardrobes of them; the stores are our wardrobes.  If the weather
changes the stores are ready for us everywhere with wraps or
heavier or lighter materials.  It must be a remote expedition
indeed that needs a change of raiment.  We wear less clothing than
our ancestors, partly because of our healthier condition, partly
because we do not like to hide lovely bodies, but mainly because in
the past men wrapped themselves up against every contingency.  They
wore hats whenever they were not under a roof, socks inside their
boots, buttons on their sleeve–cuffs, collars and ties.  It seems
as though these elaborations became necessary to social prestige
because of the general shortage.  In an age of scarcity it was a
testimonial to one's worth to be fully clad.  In the nineteenth
century the well–to–do wore gold watch–chains and gloves, which
they carried in their hands in hot weather, as further evidence of
substantial means.</p><p>Housing again, under the Air and Sea Control, took off from the
point where the hotel–flat had left it in 1930.  There was never
any attempt to resume the building of those small permanent houses
which were spread so abundantly over England, for example, after
the World War.  The first task of the new world control was mainly
sanitary.  Infection lurked everywhere; four decades of social
disorder had made every building a decaying disease–trap for the
young that were born into it.  The Housing Control rebuilt the
housing quarters of the rotten old towns in the form of blocks of
dwellings, clean, spacious and convenient, but, to our eyes now,
very squat and dull.  They went from ten to twelve stories high,
and very soundly and honestly made.  Everywhere they had water,
lighting, heating in the colder climates, and sanitation.  The
picturesquely clustering rural villages were replaced all over the
earth by the same type of concentrated house–block, the style and
material varying only so far as conditions of climate required it.
The villages were literally swept up into these piles.  Even where
small private cultivation was still going on, the concentration
into these mansions occurred and the peasants bicycled out to their
properties.  Every block had its crèche, its school, its store and
its general meeting–rooms.</p><p>As we look back on it this supersession of the single separate
unlit, undrained and waterless hut or hovel, cottage or little
steading seems to have been a swift business, but in reality it
took from 1980 to 2030, much more than half the average lifetime,
to spread this new conception of housing over most of the world,
and by that time in the more advanced regions the older blocks were
already being replaced by more beautiful and convenient creations.</p><p>Historical Pictures shows us the whole process.  We see the
jumbling growths of the early phase of the twentieth century;
towering apartment–houses and hotels struggling up, far above the
churches, mosques, pagodas and public buildings, out of a dense
undergrowth of slums.  Then come arrest and decline.  The pictures
become as full of ruins, sheds and makeshift buildings as the
drawings of Albrecht Dürer.  Amidst these appear air–raid shelters
with their beetling covers, first–air pillars with their chequered
markings, and anti–aircraft forts.  Further ruin ensues and we see
life disorganized by the Great Plague.</p><p>Then suddenly these stout, squat, virtuous new blocks thrust into
the scene and the battered past vanishes.  A new Age has begun.
The towns grow larger, finer and more varied.  The housing blocks
are grouped with the expanding stores, public clubs and hotels in
parks and gardens near to the aerodrome, and convenient for
whatever industry gives the agglomeration its importance.  The
public club became prominent after C.E. 2000, both architecturally
and socially.  That again was the revival of two old ideas; it was
a combination of the idea of the English or American club with the
idea of the Baths to which the Roman citizens resorted.  Here from
the start were grouped the gymnastic and sports halls, dancing–
floors, conference rooms, the perpetual news cinema, libraries,
reading–rooms, small studies, studios and social centres of the
reviving social life.</p><p>The twenty–first century rediscovered an experience of the
nineteenth and of the first centuries of the Christian Era, a
discovery that was also made by Alexander the Great, that it is
much easier to build great modern cities in new places than to
modernize the old centres of activity.  And the more vital these
old centres remained the more difficult was their reconstruction,
because it meant the interruption and transfer of important
activities to new quarters.  New York was typical of this lag in
rebuilding.  Up to quite recently Lower New York has been the most
old–fashioned city in the world, unique in its gloomy antiquity.
The last of the ancient skyscrapers, the Empire State Building, is
even now under demolition in C.E. 2106!</p><p>This was not because New York has fallen out of things, but, on the
contrary, because it was in the van of the new movement.  We have
already quoted Nicholson's account of its reviving importance in
1960.  A year or so later it became the headquarters of the
American branch of the Sea and Air Control, a western equivalent to
Basra.  The swiftly expanding activities of the new government
needed immediate housing, and the gaunt surviving piles of Lower
New York were adapted hastily to its accommodation.  This kept them
going for a time, and then arose a prolonged controversy between
rival schools of planning for the reconstruction of that strangely
vital city.  It is not only true that the poorer the world was the
more it was encumbered by property, but also that the more
vigorously a place or a building is being used in progressive work
the more difficult it is to keep it up to date.</p><p>Since the middle of the twenty–first century there has been a
world–wide reappearance of the individual home, more particularly
on the countryside, by the sea, and amidst forests and mountain
scenery.  But it has reappeared in a new form.  It is not really
the same thing as the old cottage and country house.</p><p>The idea of a home made of portable material, constructed at some
convenient industrial centre and sent to any desired site, was
already in the minds of such restless innovators as Henry Ford
before the Decline and Fall.  The country college, the country
house, is an imaginative outlet.  For great numbers of men and
women comes a phase when the desire for that little peculiar place,
with its carefully chosen site, its distinctive long–coveted
amenities, its outlet upon the woods, the mountain, the jungle or
the sea, has an overpowering appeal.  There they will live, dream,
work and be happy.  Few of the many who had that dream could
satisfy it in the old days.  Some rare, rich persons were able to
buy land, build elaborately after their desires, make gardens.
When they died or became bankrupt other people without the leisure
to make their own homes bought the abandoned home.  They would far
rather have made a place for themselves, but there stood the
predecessor's desire in brick or stone, solid and irremovable, and
they did what they could, by means of alterations, to eliminate the
taste of him.</p><p>But as plenty and mechanical power increased, as the new road
system made more and more of the earth accessible, as power–cables
and water supply spread everywhere, it became easy not only to
clear away and obliterate the traces of houses that were done for,
but to bring a pleasant individualized country house within the
purchasing power of an increasing proportion of the population.
The mastery of power in our time is manifested almost as much by
its swift scrapping and scavenging as by its limitless productivity.
Nowadays a man or woman may hit upon an unoccupied site, spend a few
pleasant weeks planning and revising projects and designs, and give
his order.  In a month his home is ready, in a day or so more the
foundation has been laid, and in three or four weeks the dream is
realized; the house stands as he wished it to stand, connected to
the power mains, supplied with water, furnished to his taste smiling
and ready.  It is hardly more trouble than ordering an aeroplane or
an automobile.</p><p>In its earlier stages the evocation of the preconstructed house was
not so rapid, but from the first it was far quicker than the
laborious piling up of the old–world builder.</p><p>And with an equal facility now a house is cleared away.  We no
longer think it meet to wear another man's abandoned house any more
than we think it proper to wear the clothes of the dead.  Clearing
away, says Michael Kemal, is the primary characteristic of the
Modern Age.  The Age of Frustration was essentially an age that
could not clear away, either debts, sovereignties, patriotisms, old
classes, old boundaries, old buildings, old scores or old
grievances.  It is only in the past century that man has learnt the
real lesson of plenty, that far more important than getting things
is getting rid of things.  We are rich universally because we are
no longer rich personally.</p><p>We have mentioned the travelling wealthy man of the seventeenth
century, for then only the wealthy aristocrats could travel freely,
and we have glanced at the cumbersome impedimenta of his voyage.
Compare him with any ordinary man today who decides to take a
holiday and go to the ends of the earth.  He may arrange with a
travel bureau overnight for one or two special accommodations, then
off he goes in the clothes he wears.  He takes a wallet with his
money account, his identification papers and perhaps a memorandum
book.  He may wear, as many people do, a personal ornament or so
that has taken a hold upon his imagination.  He may carry something
to read or a specimen he wants to show.  Whatever else he is likely
to want on his way he will find on his way.  He needs no other
possessions because his possessions are everywhere.  We have solved
the problem of socializing property, the problem the early
twentieth century was unable to solve.  We have the use and
consumption of material goods without the burthen of ownership.</p></section><footer/></body></html>