<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>6: The Average Man Grows Older and Wiser</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch05s05.xhtml" title="5: Organization of Plenty"/><link rel="next" href="ch05s07.xhtml" title="7: Language and Mental Growth"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="6: The Average Man Grows Older and Wiser" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268641389500"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">6: The Average Man Grows Older and Wiser</h2></div></div></div><p>The numbers and the quality of the human population have changed
very greatly in the past two centuries.  Always these things have
varied; every animal and vegetable species fluctuates continually
in the numbers and quality of its individuals; but it is only
recently that these movements have been recorded and examined
systematically.  The anti–progressives of the early twentieth
century loved to assert that "human nature" never altered; to
imagine that the men of the Stone Age felt and thought like bank
clerks picnicking in a cave, and that the ideas of Confucius and
Buddha were easily interchangeable with the ideas of Rousseau, Karl
Marx or De Windt.  They were not simply ignorant but misinformed
about almost every essential fact in the past experiences and
present situation of the race.  Only when the twenty–first century
was well under way did any consciousness of the primary operating
forces in human biology appear in the discussion and conduct of
world affairs.</p><p>In the year 1800 the total population of the world was under 900
millions, and the average age was about 22.  In 1900 the population
had doubled and the average age had risen by nearly ten years.  In
1935 a maximum was attained of 2000 millions and the average age
had mounted to nearly 40.  In a hundred years the facilities for
intercommunication and physical reaction had increased beyond all
measure.  But the statesmen, educators and lawyers of that age, as
we have shown very plainly in this history, were unaware of any of
these differences that had occurred since their methods were
developed.  They drooled along according to precedent.  A set–back
for adjustment was therefore inevitable.  We have told the broad
facts of the crash that began with the war massacres of 1914–18 and
culminated in the cycle of pestilences before 1957.  In thirty
years the population of the earth fell to about one thousand
millions or less, and the average age receded to something about
23.  This was a stupendous recession, not merely in numbers but in
the maturity of the average mind.</p><p>Then came the Air and Sea Control and the First and the Second
Council with their restoration of hygienic conditions and their
scientific planning.  The increase of population was watched and
restrained for a century, but the average age extended until now it
is 62 and still rising.  The population total crept back to 1500
millions in 2060 and reached 2000 millions again in 2085.  It has
become manifest that such a population is no longer unwieldy, and
that with the scientific education and behaviour control we now
possess a considerable further increase can be contemplated without
dismay.</p><p>The population of the earth is now 2500 millions, and it will
probably be let up to 4000 millions as rapidly as the world is
keyed up for its full support and happiness.  The danger of such a
population swarming dangerously or getting into panics, mental
jams, crushes and insanitary congestions grows less and less.  The
opinion of contemporary authorities is that 4000 millions is an
optimum, and that before many decades have passed it will be
possible to keep most of those born actively and happily alive to
something like 90 years of age.  But the question of the
possibility and advisability of prolonging the individual life more
than three or four decades beyond the "threescore and ten" of the
Biblical barbarian is still an open one.  It is possible that there
is a limit to the memories a brain can carry and to its power of
taking new interest in fresh events.  There may be a natural death
for most people in the future about the age of a hundred or a
little more, as painless and acceptable as going to bed and
sleeping after a long and interesting day.</p><p>These quantitative biological alterations involve the profoundest
differences in the quality of every life concerned.  It is not
simply that each individual has now a justifiable faith that he
will live out his life to the end, but that the conditions in which
he lives call out quite a different reaction system from that
evoked in the past.  Before the Middle Ages people thought of their
grandparents as older and mightier people, but we think of our
ancestors as younger and feebler people.  Those earlier generations
were like fresh–water fish, living in shallow, saline and readily
dried–up water, in comparison with others of the same species
living in a deep, abundant, well–aerated and altogether congenial
lake.  They were continually uncomfortable, constantly stranded by
circumstances; they flapped about wildly and died early.  Although
they were the same in essence, their behaviour, their very
movements, were like the behaviour of a different species of being.</p><p>Consider the existence of a young man in Shakespeare's time.  If he
did not die young he aged rapidly.  He would be heavy, old and
pompous at forty.  A swarm of ailments lay in wait for him to
emphasize and accelerate his decay.  Youth was stuff that would not
endure.  The beauty and vitality of women were even more
evanescent.  So they snatched at love and adventure.  The world was
full of Romeos and Juliets at the crest of their passionate lives
in their teens, who nowadays would be in the college stage of
education, a score of years away from any conclusive drama.  The
literature of the time witnesses to a universal normal swift
transitoriness.  The simple precipitate love story, the jealousy,
the headlong revenge and so on makes the substances of drama,
romance and poem.  That and the grab at spendable wealth: El
Dorado, treasure trove or robbery attempted and defeated.  A career
was made or marred by a week's folly, and there was little time to
recover it before the end.  It is extraordinarily interesting to
note all the things in life that are left out by the Elizabethan
literature, and so to measure that smaller brighter circle of
interest in that age.</p><p>The changing biological conditions between 1840 and 1940 mirror
themselves faithfully in the art and reading of the decades.  The
novel, which is at first pervaded by a gay hello to life, which
accepts everything as cheerfully as a young animal, which laughs,
caricatures and incites, becomes reflective, analytical,
purposeful.  Life no longer ends at the first rush.  The proportion
of novels to other books diminishes.  The penetration of the
individual consciousness by the great social and economic processes
that were going on becomes more and more evident.  When literature
revived at the close of the twentieth century it was an adult
literature, expressing the mentality of readers and writers who
were fully grown men and women in a planning world that had ceased
to be accidental and incoherent.  In the novel as it then
reappeared there is much more about personal love and the interplay
of character, but far less (and the proportion continues to
diminish) about the primary love adventure.</p><p>That diminution of haste and avidity, of the quick egotism and
swift uncritical judgment of youth, still continues.  The
deliberation, serenity and breadth of reference in the normal life
increase.  The years from thirty to seventy were formerly a sort of
dump for the consequences of the first three decades; now they are
the main part of life, the years of work, expression and complete
self–discovery, to which these earlier stages are the bright,
delightful prelude.  There was a time when the man or woman over
forty felt something of a survivor; he was "staying on"; relatively
the world swarmed with youth, with the swiftness, rivalries and
shallowness of youth: the fitness of the ill–protected body had
gone already; the elderly people who were "getting on for fifty"
moved slowly and had duller if sounder apprehensions.  But now most
of us are in the graver years with our bodies and apprehensions
unimpaired, and there is no longer the same effect of being rather
in the way of a juvenile treat.  The juvenile treat, the age when
even the old aped the young, ended in the World War and the
economic collapse.  After that came a struggle, at first
unconscious and then open and declared, between youth and mental
maturity.</p><p>In the bad years after the World War for a couple of generations
there was a very unhappy relapse towards youthful predominance.
The old people had failed to avert the collapse, the legitimate
seniors for the new period were dead and broken and morally
disorganized, and there was a sort of poetic justice in the stormy
release of puerility that ensued.  Italy was scourged by its
hobbledehoys in black shirts; Russia was ruled by the blue–chinned
Young; Ireland was devastated by hooligan patriots; presently
Germany, after brooding over its defeat for ten years, had a
convulsive relapse to fiercely crazy boyishness in the Nazis.
Indian patriotism had a kindred immaturity.  The tender years of
many of the young revolutionaries executed by the British, outrage
our standards of toleration.  Everywhere was youthful ignorance
with lethal weapons in its hands, conceited, self–righteous,
exalted, blind to the tale of consequences.  Breaking up things is
the disposition of youth, and making is not yet in its experience.
Liberalism and the middle–aged had a phase of unprecedented
ineffectiveness.  There seemed to be no judgment left in the world,
and the young, in masks and requisitioned cars, making nocturnal
raids, indulging in punitive cruelties, beating, torturing,
displaying in equal measure physical recklessness and moral panic,
came near to wrecking the whole civilizing process.</p><p>It is an interesting task to trace the gradual maturing of these
adolescent organizers that seized so much of the control of the
world in that age of transitional disorder.  There are voluminous
books in which Fascism in 1920, Fascism in 1930, and Fascism in
1940, or again Communism in the same decades, is elaborately
compared with itself.  After all their impatience and sentimentality,
their rank patriotism and reactionary cant, we find these youth
movements unobtrusively sneaking back to planning, discipline, and
scientific methods.  Millions of young men who began Fascist, Nazi,
Communist and the like, blind nationalists and irrational partisans,
became Modern State men in their middle years.  They became at last
instruments to realize the plans and visions of the very men they
had hunted, maltreated and murdered in the crude zeal of their first
beginnings.</p><p>But now youth is well in hand for ever, and when we speak of a man
to–day we really mean a different being from a nineteenth–century
man.  Bodily he is sounder and fitter, almost completely free from
disease; mentally he is clear and clean and educated to a pitch
that was still undreamt of two centuries ago.  He is over fifty
instead of being under thirty.  He is less gregarious in his
instincts and less suggestible because he is further away from the
"home and litter" mentality, but he is far more social and
unselfish in his ideology and mental habits.  He is, in fact, for
all the identity of his heredity, a different animal.  He is bigger
and stronger, more clear–headed, with more self–control and more
definitely related to his fellow creatures.</p><p>This is manifest everywhere, but it is particularly visible in
such regions as Bengal and Central China.  There we find the
direct descendants of shrill, unhappy, swarming, degenerate,
undernourished, under–educated, underbred and short–lived
populations among the finest, handsomest, longest–lived and ablest
of contemporary humanity.  This has been achieved without any
attempt at Positive Eugenics; it has resulted from the honest
application of the Obvious to health, education, and economic
organization, within little more than a hundred years.  These
populations were terribly weeded by the pestilences of the age of
disorder and grimly disciplined by the Tyranny.  They are now,
after that pruning and training bearing as fine flowers of literary
and scientific achievement as any other racial masses.</p></section><footer/></body></html>