<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>8: Sublimation of Interest</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch05s07.xhtml" title="7: Language and Mental Growth"/><link rel="next" href="ch05s09.xhtml" title="9: A New Phase in the History of Life"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="8: Sublimation of Interest" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268641426000"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">8: Sublimation of Interest</h2></div></div></div><p>Not only is the average man to–day an older and graver creature
than his ancestor of three centuries ago, but he is very
differently employed.  There has been a great diversion of his
interest from the primary necessities of life.</p><p>Three centuries ago, well over ninety per cent of the human
population was absorbed either in the direct production of
necessities or in the scramble to get them from their original
producers.  Direct producers, the peasants and toilers, the
entrepreneurs and their managers and directors, and direct
distributors accounted for upward of eighty per cent of the human
total; the rest were the millions of interveners, usurers, claim–
makers, landowners, rentiers, solicitors, speculators, parasites,
robbers, and thieves who were deemed necessary to ginger up the
economic process.  The forces of law, order and education,
excluding temporary conscription and levies for military ends, took
up five or six per cent of the residue, and a small minority,
something under five per cent of the total population, supplied all
the artistic effort, the scientific enquiry, the social and
political thought, the living soul of the entire social body.</p><p>The systems of interest of most people were therefore restricted
almost entirely to work and the struggle to possess.  They had to
think continually of the work they did either for their own profit
or for the personal profit, comfort or fantasy of some employer.
They had to think of keeping their jobs or of getting fresh ones,
and this, in the days of narrowing employment after the Hoover
Slump, became at last a monstrous obsession of the brain.  What
they earned they had to spend carefully or guard carefully, for the
rascaldom of business was everywhere seeking to give nothing for
something.  Sometimes, sick of their narrow lives, they would
gamble in the desperate hope of a convulsive enlargement, and for
most of them gambling meant disappointment and self–reproach.  Add
to these worries a little love, a good deal of hate, and a
desperate struggle to see it all in a hopeful and honourable light,
a desperate hunger to be flattered and reassured, and you have the
content of ninety–nine per cent of the human brains that made the
world of 1930.  They could no more escape from this restricted
circle of urgently clamorous interests, hardly ampler than the
circle of an animal's interest, than the animals can.</p><p>The Modern State has broken this cramping circle of interests for
every human being.  We are still creatures with brains like our
forefathers, corresponding ganglia to ganglia and fibre to fibre,
but WE ARE NOT USING THOSE BRAINS FOR THE SAME PURPOSES.  The
Modern State, by ensuring plenty and controlling the increase of
population, has taken all the interests of the food–hunt and the
food–scramble, and all the interests of the struggle to down–and–
out our human competitors, away from the activities of the
individual brain.  A relatively small number of specialized workers
keep the necessary Controls of these primary preoccupations going.
We worry about food, drink, clothing, health and personal freedom
no more.  The work we MUST do is not burthensome in amount, and it
is the most congenial our educational guardians can find for us and
help us to find.  When it is done we are sure of the result; nobody
is left in the world to cheat us or rob us of our pay.  We are
still competitive, more so perhaps than ever; jealousy still wars
with generosity in us; the story of our personal affections is
rarely a simple story; but the interest we feel in our work is a
masterful interest and not a driven interest, and our competition
is for distinction, appreciation and self–approval and not for
mutual injury.  There has been a release of by far the larger
moiety of the mental energy of the normal man from its former
inescapable preoccupations.</p><p>This steady obliteration of primary motives is manifested most
illuminatingly by the statistics of what used to be "Crime and
Punishment", figures of the offences, insubordinations and
deliberate outrages upon social order and the consequent
punishments and corrective proceedings that are issued by the
disciplinary organization of the Behaviour Control.  Statistics for
the years of decadence are not forthcoming, but there is plentiful
material from the comparatively orderly and prosperous period
between 1890 and 1930.  Great Britain then constituted the
healthiest and most law–abiding community in the world, but the
figures that emerge to the student of history present what seems to
us an appalling welter of crime.  Stealing, cheating of every sort,
forgery, burglary, robbery with violence, poisoning and other forms
of murder, occurred daily.  It did not seem as though that thick
defilement of wrongdoing about property could ever cease.
Innumerable suicides occurred through pecuniary worry.  Yet now all
these crimes, which filled the jails, arising out of the scramble
for money and property in an age of insufficiency, have almost
completely vanished from human life.  The Behaviour Control Report
for 2104 (2105 is not yet available) records 715 cases of stealing
for the whole world.  In nearly every case the object stolen was
some personal work of art, some small jewel, a piece of embroidery,
a pet animal, several children, and—in one instance—the bulb of a
new variety of lily that aroused the instinct to possess and care
for.  It is doubtful whether there were many undetected or
unreported thefts.</p><p>There has not, however, been anything like the same abolition of
personal offences.  They have diminished.  But while the property
offences have diminished to the scale of one–ten–millionth of the
old–world figures, these others show a reduction in the nature of
single instances to former hundreds.  Many types in our population
are still very easily turned toward sexual lawlessness.  Beautiful
and attractive people and particularly attractive children are not
yet perfectly immune from undesired solicitation, personal
persecution, annoying assault and resentful injury.  Jealousy is
still a dangerous passion, more particularly below the age of
forty.  The Behaviour Control ascribes nearly 520,000 offences to
this group of urgencies, mostly assaults of varying degree of
malignity, culminating in 67 murders.  There were also 2192
suicides in the total.  These figures show only a slight
improvement upon the annual average for the previous decade.</p><p>Another difficult class of offence which finds no exact parallel in
the criminal statistics of former times, unless the British offence
of "malignant mischief" is to be put in this group, are acts of
annoyance, destruction, assault and so forth, due to competitive
jealousy and the exasperation aroused, often quite unwittingly, by
the bearing or achievements of one's fellow creatures.  This sort
of misbehaviour varies in degree from the black hatred and fury of
an uncontrolled egotism to what verges in some cases upon
justifiable criticism of slightly fatuous or self–complacent
behaviour.  Four murders, some hundreds of assaults and acts of
wanton destruction in this category, witness to the fact that this
world is still not a Paradise for every type of individual.  Either
they are bitter by some inner necessity or they have been
embittered.  Yet when we take the grand total of every misdeed that
had to be dealt with last year, counting even the most petty
occasions for restoration, warning or reproof, and find it is just
three quarters of a million in a world of 2500 million people, we
have a quantitative measure of human progress in two brief
centuries that justifies a very stalwart confidence in the human
outlook.  The imagination of man's heart is no longer evil
continually.  It is only evil occasionally, and the practical task
of our social psychologists is to reduce those occasions and
provocations.</p><p>The abundant release of brain–stuff, the mental plenty which has
resulted from the organization of material plenty, is of necessity
being directed into new channels.  That meagre half per cent or
less of creative workers of the old régime, the few curious men who
played about with novel ideas, the odd men of leisure who collected
"rarities" and inventions, has grown into a mighty body of enquiry,
experiment, verification and record which is becoming now the
larger part of the world's population.</p><p>We know now certainly what the people of three centuries ago never
suspected, that the human brain released from hunger, fear and the
other primary stresses is very easily amenable not only to creative
and directive desire but also to kindly and helpful impulses.
Almost all the people who keep our productive, our distributing and
transport services going are there because they find the work
entertaining, because they like making the machine work well and
helping people.  There is a satisfaction in being able to do things
skilfully for others that they could not do nearly so well for
themselves.  The barbers, shoemakers, tailors, dressmakers,
hatters, outfitters and so forth in the great stores to–day are
very different people from the rather obsequious, deferential
"inferiors" who made our great–great–grandfathers presentable to
the world.  Their essential interest is to make their customers
sightly and comfortable and not to earn a profit for an employer.
The old literature reeks with contempt for barbers and tailors and
cobblers, often the contempt of profound resentment.  If the common
man despised the cobbler, the cobbler pinched his toe and chafed
his heel.  The barber, it seemed, did no more than cut hair rather
badly, and the tailor cut clothes.  Except by accident, the barber
had ceased to be a barber–surgeon.  But nowadays the old–world
barber would scarcely recognize himself in the barber–dentist, the
kindly expert who sees to our coiffure, gives attention to our
teeth, scrutinizes our mouth, hair and skin to detect any evidence
of failing health, and sends us on our way refreshed, encouraged or
warned.  Often his friend the tailor or dressmaker will call in
while he deals with us to consider our general bravery and
improvement, and suggest variations of our exercise and habits.</p><p>The old distributing trades have lost their sharp demarcation from
the advisory professions.  They are in touch with the guardians of
development who have replaced the schoolmasters, nurses,
governesses, tutors and so forth of the old time, and with the
general advisers who have taken on the tasks of the family
solicitor, religious minister, private confessor and general
practitioner of the past.  These advisory and directive professions
probably number two or three times as big a proportion of the whole
population as the lawyers, educationists and doctors of the
nineteenth century.  They merge again into another stratum, the
specialist teachers, concerned with developing and imparting skills
and building up and maintaining the common ideology.  This class
again passes by insensible degrees into the worlds of technical
work, art, literature and scientific research.</p><p>The primary producers and elaborators of material, our
agriculturalists, engineers, chemists, transport men and industrial
directors, also do their work because they like doing it.  It
satisfies them.  They like their materials, they like their
difficulties, they like the order of their days.  In spite of an
increasing output per head of population and an increasing variety
and elaboration of the things we use, socially or individually, the
numerical proportion of this section of the human population does
not increase.  Efficiency still outruns need and desire.  The two
and a half years of compulsory public service, which is an integral
part of our education, supplies a larger and larger proportion of
such toil as is still unavoidable.</p><p>This release of human energy from primary needs is a process that
seems likely to continue indefinitely.  And all the forces that
have made our world–wide social life and keep it going direct that
released energy towards the achievement of fresh knowledge and the
accumulation and rendering of fresh experience.  There is a
continual sublimation of interest.  Man becomes more curious, more
excited, more daring, skilful, and pleasantly occupied every year.
The more we learn of the possibilities of our world and the
possibilities of ourselves, the richer, we learn, is our
inheritance.  This planet, which seemed so stern a mother to
mankind, is discovered to be inexhaustible in its bounty.  And the
greatest discovery man has made has been the discovery of himself.
Leonardo da Vinci with his immense breadth of vision, his creative
fervour, his curiosity, his power of intensive work, was the
precursor of the ordinary man, as the world is now producing him.</p></section><footer/></body></html>