<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>3: Geogonic Planning</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch05s02.xhtml" title="2: Keying Up the Planet"/><link rel="next" href="ch05s04.xhtml" title="4: Changes in the Control of Behaviour"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="3: Geogonic Planning" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268641356480"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">3: Geogonic Planning</h2></div></div></div><p>Among the "deferred projects" that lie behind our current
activities, and second only to the system of schemes for inducing
and directing a great increase in human variability, is the complex
of plans that have been drawn out to alter the terrestrial
contours.  Here again is something far too great and dangerous for
our present wisdom, but something which it seems inevitable our
race will ultimately attempt.</p><p>At present, and for many generations yet, we are still the
creatures and subjects of geography; the oceans and great mountain
chains condition our lives.  They determine habitats, which again
determine the human type best adapted to live for the greater part
of its life in this or that region.  Every kind of us, dark or
fair, thick–set or slender, black or buff, has its own distinctive
best place in which to rear its children and work and rest.  It may
roam the earth as it will, but only in certain regions is it
altogether at home.  No type is at home everywhere.  There is no
universal man.  A universal type of man would be possible only on a
flat and uniform earth.  There is a necessary variety in humanity
which no one now desires to diminish.</p><p>But the question the modern geographer puts to us is whether there
is not a classification of habitats possible into very desirable,
desirable, undesirable, and inimical, and whether a certain
modification of the planet–levels operating in conjunction with the
restoration of forests now in progress would not greatly increase
the desirable habitats, by a redistribution of rainfall, a change
in the fall of the surface waters, protection from winds and so
forth.  A not very considerable rise in the Appennines, for
instance, would bring them up to the permanent snow–line and change
the character of the entire Italian peninsula.  And an increase in
desirable habitats may bring with it an increase in the variety of
desirable human types.</p><p>Yesterday this sort of thing was called "chimerical," to–day it is
impracticable and unnecessary, because of the volcanic forces that
might be released.  So for the present the geogonist, like the
geneticist, must content himself with dreams—in his case dreams of
moulding a fire–spouting, quivering planet closer to the expanding
needs of man.  His turn to remodel the world will come perhaps in a
thousand years or so.  There is plenty of time for that.</p></section><footer/></body></html>