<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>4: Changes in the Control of Behaviour</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch05s03.xhtml" title="3: Geogonic Planning"/><link rel="next" href="ch05s05.xhtml" title="5: Organization of Plenty"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="4: Changes in the Control of Behaviour" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268641375380"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">4: Changes in the Control of Behaviour</h2></div></div></div><p>The past forty–eight years have seen very great modifications in
the social control of individual behaviour.  There has been a very
great increase in the science, skill and quality of the teachers
throughout the world, but quite apart from that the character and
purpose of education and police have changed profoundly.</p><p>Education as we understand it to–day began about the middle of the
twentieth century.  It had only the slenderest continuity with the
education of the preceding age, just as the education of
Christendom had only the slenderest continuity with the education
of the pagan world.  Reading, writing, and counting were taught in
all three systems, but beyond that the very objectives were
different.  Modern education began as propaganda after the time of
De Windt, as the propaganda of the Modern State.  It sought to
establish a new complete ideology and a new spirit which would
induce the individual to devote himself and to shape all his
activities to one definite purpose, to the attainment and
maintenance of a progressive world–socialism, using an efficient
monetary system as its normal medium of relationship.</p><p>This seemed, and was, a gigantic undertaking.  It faced colossal
obstacles in ordinary human nature.  But it was supremely necessary
if human civilization was to continue.  The alternative was a
relapse through chaotic barbarism to animal casualness and final
extinction.  Thought and behaviour patterns had to be shaped
therefore to subserve this objective, to the relative disregard of
any other conceivable purpose.  The Modern State became the whole
duty of man.  This propaganda passed necessarily into a training
for public service and a universal public education.  The Modern
State Fellowship was a trained body pledged to impose its own type
of training upon all the world.  It proposed to be the New
Humanity.  It would accept no compromises.  It made the whole
educational framework militant.  No other type of school and no
other system of teaching was tolerated for more than half a
century.  Never before was man so directed and disciplined.</p><p>The educationists of this period of the First Council and the Air
Dictatorship were particularly sedulous to restrain what they
called "aberrant motives."  Austerity in eating and drinking,
hardiness, severity in exercise, a jealousy of leisure, and a
profound distrust of æsthetic and sensuous gratification, and
particularly of sexual excitement, marked the educational ideals of
these men who set out to demodel the world.  In the early stages of
progressive and revolutionary thought in the nineteenth century
there had been considerable laxity of private conduct.  There had
been a revolt against what was called "Christian morality," and a
disposition not simply to condone but encourage indulgence in forms
that had hitherto been prohibited.  Most of this "liberalism" in
conduct had vanished from revolutionary circles by the second or
third decade of the twentieth century.  The Modern State movement,
as it developed, was pervaded by a disapproval of every sort of
sensuous or emotional affection.  The business in hand could not
suffer it.  It wasted time; it wasted energy.  It let in too much
intrigue.  It undermined the common loyalty.  Not even Christianity
in its most militant stages was so set against the dissipation of
energy in this direction.  The new sexual puritanism differed from
the old in its toleration of birth control, its disregard of formal
marriage, and a certain charity towards the first excesses of
youth, but it insisted with even greater vigour upon public decency
and upon the desirability of sexual seriousness, enduring
connexions, and complete loyalty between lovers.  As a result the
world was far more monogamous, more decorous, and decently busy
after 2000 C.E., than it had ever been before.</p><p>Many critics to–day are disposed to consider the repressions of
that time excessive.  We are now in a different phase; the militant
age is past.  They allege that there was a vast amount of secret
and solitary vice and moral and mental distortion beneath the cold
surface of things during these disciplined years, and they consider
that the undeniable harshness and obstinacy of the Second Council
as it grew old was a direct result of its puritanism.  They do not
hesitate to use such terms as masochist and sadist.  But this is by
no means a unanimous opinion.  Equally reputable authorities deny
that there was any such seething pit of stifled desires and
thwarted motives under the orderly and healthy activities of the
constructive time as this new school pretends.  In no psychological
problem are we still so inadequately informed as in the
quantitative estimate of sexual impulse and restraint.</p><p>Our investigators work at literature, biographies, diaries,
pictorial art, police reports in their intricate attempt to recover
the vanished mental states of these departed generations.  There
seems to be a sort of rhythm in these things.  The contrast between
present conditions and conditions seventy years ago is paralleled
in history by the contrast between English social life in 1855 and
1925.  There also we have a phase of extreme restraint and decorum
giving way to one of remarkable freedom.  We can trace every phase.
Every phase is amply documented.  There are not the slightest
grounds for supposing that the earlier period was one of intense
nervous strain and misery.  There was a general absence of vivid
excitation, and the sexual life flowed along in an orderly fashion.
It did not get into politics or the control of businesses.  It
appears in plays and novels like a tame animal which is not to be
made too much of.  It goes out of the room whenever necessary.  By
comparison England in 1920 was out for everything it could do
sexually.  It did everything and boasted about it and incited the
young.  As the gravity of economic and political problems increased
and the structural unsoundness of the world became more manifest,
sexual preoccupations seem to have afforded a sort of refuge from
the mental strain demanded by the struggle.  People distracted
themselves from the immense demands of the situation by making a
great noise about the intensifications and aberrations of the
personal life.  There was a real propaganda of drugs and
homosexuality among the clever young.  Literature, always so
responsive to its audience, stood on its head and displayed its
private parts.  It produced a vast amount of solemn pornography,
facetious pornography, sadistic incitement, re–sexualized
religiosity and verbal gibbering in which the rich effectiveness of
obscene words was abundantly exploited.  It is all available for
the reader to–day who cares to examine it.  He will find it neither
shocking, disgusting, exciting or interesting.  He will find it
comically pretentious and pitifully silly.</p><p>It is small wonder that the scattered workers for the Modern State,
who were struggling heroically with the huge problems of social
dislocation and social reconstruction, developed an antipathy
against these æsthetic and sexual preoccupations which robbed them
of the help and service of so many hopeful youngsters.  The Modern
State Movement was unobtrusively puritanical from the outset.
After the romantic lapses of the First World Council it became
oppressively puritanical.</p><p>It was the precedent of the moral disorder of the early twentieth
century to which the Educational Control appealed, a hundred and
twenty years later, to justify its sustained regulation of private
morals and repression of stimulation.  It failed to realize the
profound difference of the new conditions.  The florid ebullition
of sexual troubles, sexual refinements and sexual grossnesses in
the Age of Frustration had been a natural consequence of
frustration.  Everywhere in the face of challenges too huge to
face, rich and poor alike found themselves aimless, unoccupied,
menaced.  Ill health was increasing.  Drugs, alcohol and sex were
available to excite and soothe and deaden their distressed nerves.
Good–looking youth, which could not sell its brains or labour,
could still find a market for its person.  About every nucleus of
unjustly acquired wealth or demoralized power prostitution and
parasitism festered.  What else was there to do in that ugly,
unhappy and dangerous world?  But the world of 2040 was a busy,
keenly interested and healthy world again.</p><p>We cannot detail in this general review of history the reluctant
lifting of one prohibition after another.  We may now go naked,
love as we like, eat, drink and amuse ourselves with our work or as
we will, subject only to a proper respect for unformed minds.  And
no harm has been done at all.  When the Puritanical Tyranny began,
its directors felt they had imprisoned a tiger that would otherwise
consume all the plenty and safety they achieved.  Very reluctantly
indeed, bit by bit and after endless disputes, were their
prohibitions relaxed.  And no tiger appeared.  Properly nourished
people do not take to gluttony, properly interested people are not
overwhelmed by sex.  Instead of a tiger appeared a harmless, quiet,
unobtrusive and not unpleasing pussy–cat, which declined to be in
any way notable.</p><p>Humanity was changing.  The threatened outbreak of pornography,
abnormality and sex excitation did not occur.  But anyone who
studies the fiction and drama of the past half–century and compares
it with the similar literature of the old world will realize that
there are far more personal love and far more happy lovers than
ever before, and that physical love to demonstrate loyalty, show
preference, enrich association and seal friendship was never so
direct and beautiful.  Jealousy we have, but it is rarely
malicious; desire, but it is rarely vicious.  In this as in so many
other things progress has meant simplification.  The souls we read
about of two centuries ago strike us as grotesquely tangled,
tormented and nasty souls.  Hate mingled with their desires;
mercenary considerations were an ever present defilement; they
paired dishonestly and mated insincerely.</p><p>But while there has been this release from the strait–laced sexual
morals of the militant period, in another field there has been no
relaxation.  The new order can tolerate no tampering with the
monetary–property system that holds us all together.  Not only is
our police incessantly alert against robbery and cheating as the
old world understood it, but many gainful practices that 1920 would
have considered tolerable or even admirable are suppressed, and are
likely to be suppressed for all time.  Gambling, the mean desire
and device to get the spending of someone else's earnings, is
punished as heavily as the forgery of money checks; and all those
speculative activities which seemed to be the very texture of the
nineteenth–century social order dare not reappear now in any
disguise at all.  Money is a check for our personal needs, or for
the giving of graceful presents.  There must be no misuse of money
to gain an advantage over another human being, even with that other
human being's connivance.  There we are still bound.  That sort of
thing is the vice of cannibalism.  Beyond that liberty increases
daily.</p><p>With a sound education of mind and body and a rigorous and exact
protection of property and money from dishonourable impulses, we
have found that it is possible to give every human being such a
liberty of movement and general behaviour as would have seemed
incredible to those militant socialists who ruled the world during
the earlier decades of the last century.  But it is just because of
their stern and thorough cleansing of human life that we can now
live in freedom.  We may go anywhere in the world now, we may do
practically anything that we can possibly desire to do.</p></section><footer/></body></html>