<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>7: Language and Mental Growth</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch05s06.xhtml" title="6: The Average Man Grows Older and Wiser"/><link rel="next" href="ch05s08.xhtml" title="8: Sublimation of Interest"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="7: Language and Mental Growth" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70268641407700"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">7: Language and Mental Growth</h2></div></div></div><p>(I print this section exactly as Raven wrote it down.  It is, the
reader will remark, in very ordinary twentieth–century English.
Yet plainly if it is a part of a twenty–second–century textbook of
general history it cannot have been written originally in our
contemporary idiom.  It insists upon a refinement and enlargement
of language as if it had already occurred, but no such refinement
is evident.  It must have been translated by Raven as he dreamt it
into the prose of to–day.  If he saw that book of his at all, he
saw it not with his eyes but with his mind.  The actual page could
have had neither our lettering, our spelling, our phrasing nor our
vocabulary.)</p><p>One of the unanticipated achievements of the twenty–first century
was the rapid diffusion of Basic English as the lingua franca of
the world and the even more rapid modification, expansion and
spread of English in its wake.  The English most of us speak and
write today is a very different tongue from the English of
Shakespeare, Addison, Bunyan or Shaw; it has shed the last traces
of such archaic elaborations as a subjunctive mood; it has
simplified its spelling, standardized its pronunciation, adopted
many foreign locutions, and naturalized and assimilated thousands
of foreign words.  No deliberate attempt was made to establish it
as the world language.  It had many natural advantages over its
chief competitors, Spanish, French, Russian, German and Italian.
It was simpler, subtler, more flexible and already more widely
spoken, but it was certainly the use of Basic English which gave it
its final victory over these rivals.</p><p>Basic English was the invention of an ingenious scholar of
Cambridge in England, C. K. Ogden (1889–1990), who devoted a long
and industrious life to the simplification of expression and
particularly to this particular simplification.  It is interesting
to note that he was a contemporary of James Joyce (1882–1955), who
also devoted himself to the task of devising a new sort of English.
But while Ogden sought scientific simplification, Joyce worked
æsthetically for elaboration and rich suggestion, and vanished at
last from the pursuit of his dwindling pack of readers in a tangled
prose almost indistinguishable from the gibbering of a lunatic.
Nevertheless he added about twenty–five words to the language
which are still in use.  Ogden, after long and industrious
experimentation in the reverse direction, emerged with an English
of 850 words and a few rules of construction which would enable any
foreigner to express practically any ordinary idea simply and
clearly.  It became possible for an intelligent foreigner to talk
or correspond in understandable English in a few weeks.  On the
whole it was more difficult to train English speakers to restrict
themselves to the forms and words selected than to teach outsiders
the whole of Basic.  It was a teacher of languages, Rudolph Boyle
(1910–1959), who contrived the method by which English speakers
learnt to confine themselves, when necessary, to Basic limitations.</p><p>This convenience spread like wildfire after the First Conference of
Basra.  It was made the official medium of communication throughout
the world by the Air and Sea Control, and by 2020 there was hardly
anyone in the world who could not talk and understand it.</p><p>It is from phonetically spelt Basic English as a new starting–point
that the language we write and speak to–day developed, chiefly by
the gradual resumption of verbs and idioms from the mother tongue
and by the assimilation of foreign terms and phrases.  We speak a
language of nearly two million words nowadays, a synthetic language
in fact, into which roots, words and idioms from every speech in
the world have been poured.  K. Wang in a recent essay has shown
that there are still specializations of vocabulary.  The vocabulary
of a score of recent writers of Italian origin chosen haphazard
shows a marked preference for words derived from the Latin, in
comparison with twenty Eastern Asiatic writers whose bias is
Chinese and American.  Yet they can all understand one another and
they are all in one undivided cultural field.</p><p>There are few redundancies in the new English of today and tomorrow,
and there is an increasing disposition to take synonyms, and what
used to be classified as "rare" or "obsolete" terms, and re–define
them to convey some finer shade of meaning.  Criticism, in the form
of the Dictionary Bureau, scrutinizes, but permits desirable
additions.  One can feel little doubt about the increasing delicacy
and precision of expression to–day if we compare a contemporary book
with some English classic of the eighteenth or nineteenth century.
That is still quite understandable to us, but in its bareness and
occasional ineptitudes it seems halfway back to the limitations and
lumberingness of Early English or Gothic.</p><p>The fuller the terminology the finer the mind.  There can be very
little doubt that the brain of a twentieth–century man compared
with the brain of an ordinary man to–day, though in no way
intrinsically inferior, was a far less polished and well–adjusted
implement.  It was warped by bad habits, cumbered with a tangle of
unsound associations, clogged with unresolved complexes; it was
like a fine piece of machinery in a state of dirt and neglect.  The
modern brain is far more neatly packed and better arranged, cleaner
and better lubricated.  It not only holds much more, but it uses
the larger keyboard of our contemporary language more efficiently.
The common man to–day is apt to find the philosophers and
"thinkers" of two centuries ago unaccountably roundabout, tedious
and encumbered.  It is not so much that he finds them obscure, but
that when at last he has dragged the meanings out of their jungles
of statement into the light of day he finds he has thought all
round them.</p><p>An interesting and valuable group of investigators, whose work
still goes on, appeared first in a rudimentary form in the
nineteenth century.  The leader of this group was a certain Lady
Welby (1837–1912), who was frankly considered by most of her
contemporaries as an unintelligible bore.  She corresponded
copiously with all who would attend to her, harping perpetually on
the idea that language could be made more exactly expressive, that
there should be a "Science of Significs".  C. K. Ogden and a fellow
Fellow of Magdalene College, I. A. Richards (1893–1977), were among
the few who took her seriously.  These two produced a book, The
Meaning of Meaning, in 1923 which counts as one of the earliest
attempts to improve the language mechanism.  Basic English was a
by–product of these enquiries.  The new Science was practically
unendowed, it attracted few workers, and it was lost sight of
during the decades of disaster.  It was revived only in the early
twenty–first century.</p><p>Then Carl Ratan became the centre of a group of workers inspired by
the idea of making English more lucid and comprehensive and a truly
universal language.  His work has expanded into the voluminous
organization of the Language Bureau as we know it to–day.  The work
of that Bureau has been compared to the work of the monetary
experts who finally made money exact a hundred and fifty years ago.
Just as civilization was held back for some centuries by the
imperfections of the money nexus, so we begin to realize to–day
that our intellectual progress is by no means so rapid as it might
be because of the endless flaws and looseness of the language
nexus.</p><p>An interesting compilation in hand, which promises to become a
veritable history of philosophy and knowledge is the Language
Discard.  This project was originally set going by the Dictionary
Section of the Language Bureau, as a mere account rendered of
obsolete or obsolescent terms or terms which have become greatly
altered from their original meaning; but the enquiry into the
reasons for these changings and preferences and abandonments led
very directly into an exhaustive analysis of the primary processes
of human thought.  A series of words, "soul spirit, matter, force,
essence", for example, were built into the substance of Aryan and
Semitic thought almost from their beginnings, and it was only quite
recently that the exhaustive analyses by Yuan Shan and his
associates of these framework terms made it clear that the
processes of Chinese and Negro thinking were by no means parallel.
Translation between languages, in all matters except matters of
material statement, is always a little loose and rough, but between
the ideology underlying the literature of Eastern Asia or the
attempts of Africans to express themselves and that embodied in the
ruling language of to–day the roughness approaches violence.  That
clash, as it is examined, is likely to produce very extensive
innovations in our philosophical (general scientific) and technical
nomenclature.  We are speaking and writing a provisional language
to–day.  Our great–grandchildren will no more think of using many
of our terms and turns of expression to–day than we should think of
resorting again to the railway train, the paddle steamboat and the
needle telegraph.</p><p>This rearrangement of the association systems of the human brain
which is now in progress brings with it—long before we begin to
dream of eugenic developments—the prospect of at present
inconceivable extensions of human mental capacity.  It will involve
taking hold of issues that are at present quite outside our grasp.
There was a time when early man was no more capable of drawing a
sketch or threading a needle than a cow; it was only as his thumb
and fingers became opposable that the powers of craftsmanship and
mechanism came within his grip.  Similarly we may anticipate an
enormous extension of research and a far deeper penetration into
reality as language, our intellectual hand, is brought to a new
level of efficiency.</p><p>There is not only this sharpening and refinement of the brain going
on, but there has been what our great grandparents would have
considered an immense increase in the amount, the quality, and the
accessibility of knowledge.  As the individual brain quickens and
becomes more skilful, there also appears a collective Brain, the
Encyclopædia, the Fundamental Knowledge System which accumulates,
sorts, keeps in order and renders available everything that is
known.  The Encyclopædic organization, which centres upon
Barcelona, with its seventeen million active workers is the Memory
of Mankind.  Its tentacles spread out in one direction to millions
of investigators, checkers and correspondents, and in another to
keep the educational process in living touch with mental advance.
It is growing rapidly as the continual advance in productive
efficiency liberates fresh multitudes of workers for its services.
The mental mechanism of mankind is as yet only in its infancy.</p><p>Adolescence perhaps rather than infancy.  It is because the mind of
man is growing up that for the first time it realizes that it is
young.</p></section><footer/></body></html>