<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter I</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="pr02.xhtml" title="Preface"/><link rel="next" href="ch02.xhtml" title="Chapter II"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter I" epub:type="chapter" id="id720"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter I</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>The Castaways</em></h3></div></div></div><p>Night—a pitch–dark night! It was almost impossible to distinguish sky
from sea. From the sky, laden with clouds low and heavy, deformed and
tattered, lightning flashed every now and then, followed by muffled
rolls of thunder. At these flashes the horizon lit up for a moment and
showed deserted and melancholy.</p><p>No wave broke in foam upon the surface of the sea. There was nothing but
the regular and monotonous rolling of the swell and the gleam of ripples
under the lightning flashes. Not a breath moved across the vast plain of
ocean, not even the hot breath of the storm. But electricity so charged
the atmosphere that it escaped in phosphorescent light, and ran up and
down the rigging of the boat in tongues of Saint Elmo’s fire. Although
the sun had set four or five hours ago, the sweltering heat of the day
had not passed.</p><p>Two men talked in low tones, in the stern of a big ship’s boat that was
decked in to the foot of the mast. Her foresail and jib were flapping as
the monotonous rolling shook her.</p><p>One of these men, holding the tiller tucked under his arm, tried to
dodge the cruel swell that rolled the boat from side to side. He was a
sailor, about forty years of age, thick–set and sturdy, with a frame of
iron on which fatigue, privation, even despair, had never taken effect.
An Englishman by nationality, this boatswain was named John Block.</p><p>The other man was barely eighteen, and did not seem to belong to the
sea–faring class.</p><p>In the bottom of the boat, under the poop and seats, with no strength
left to pull the oars, a number of human beings were lying, among them a
child of five years old—a poor little creature whose whimpering was
audible, whom its mother tried to hush with idle talk and kisses.</p><p>Before the mast, upon the poop, and near the jib stays, two people sat
motionless and silent, hand in hand, lost in the most gloomy thoughts.
So intense was the darkness that it was only by the lightning flashes
that they could see each other.</p><p>From the bottom of the boat a head was lifted sometimes, only to droop
again at once.</p><p>The boatswain spoke to the young man lying by his side.</p><p>“No, no. I watched the horizon until the sun went down. No land in
sight—not a sail! But what I didn’t see this evening will perhaps be
visible at dawn.”</p><p>“But, bo’sun,” his companion answered, “we must get to land somewhere in
the next forty–eight hours, or we shall have succumbed.”</p><p>“That’s true,” John Block agreed. “Land must appear—simply must. Why,
continents and islands were made on purpose to give shelter to brave
men, and one always ends by getting to them!”</p><p>“If the wind helps one, bo’sun.”</p><p>“That is the only reason wind was invented,” John Block replied.
“To–day, as bad luck would have it, it was busy somewhere else, in the
middle of the Atlantic or the Pacific perhaps, for it didn’t blow enough
here to fill my cap. Yes, a jolly good gale would blow us merrily
along.”</p><p>“Or swallow us up, Block.”</p><p>“Oh no, not that! No, no, not that! Of all ways to bring this job to a
finish, that would be the worst.”</p><p>“Who can tell, bo’sun?”</p><p>Then for some minutes the two men were silent. Nothing could be heard
but the gentle rippling under the boat.</p><p>“How is the captain?” the young man went on.</p><p>“Captain Gould, good man, is in bad case,” John Block replied. “How
those blackguards knocked him about! The wound in his head makes him cry
out with pain. And it was an officer in whom he had every confidence who
stirred those wretches up! No, no! One fine morning, or one fine
afternoon, or perhaps one fine evening, that rascal of a Borupt shall
make his last ugly face at the yardarm or——”</p><p>“The brute! The brute!” the young man exclaimed, clenching his fists in
wrath. “But poor Harry Gould! You dressed his wounds this evening,
Block——”</p><p>“Ay, ay; and when I put him back under the poop, after I had put
compresses on his head, he was able to speak to me, though very feebly.
‘Thanks, Block, thanks,’ he said—as if I wanted thanks! ‘And land? What
about land?’ he asked. ‘You may be quite sure, captain,’ I told him,
‘that there is land somewhere, and perhaps not very far off.’ He looked
at me and closed his eyes.”</p><p>And the boatswain murmured in an aside: “Land? Land? Ah, Borupt and his
accomplices knew very well what they were about! While we were shut up
in the bottom of the hold, they altered the course; they went some
hundreds of miles away before they cast us adrift in this boat—in seas
where a ship is hardly ever seen, I guess.”</p><p>The young man had risen. He stooped, listening to port.</p><p>“Didn’t you hear anything, Block?” he asked.</p><p>“Nothing, nothing at all,” the boatswain answered; “this swell is as
noiseless as if it were made of oil instead of water.”</p><p>The young man said no more, but sat down again with his arms folded
across his breast.</p><p>Just at this moment one of the passengers sat up, and exclaimed, with a
gesture of despair:</p><p>“I wish a wave would smash this boat up, and swallow us all up with it,
rather than that we should all be given over to the horrors of
starvation! To–morrow we shall have exhausted the last of our
provisions. We shall have nothing left at all.”</p><p>“To–morrow is to–morrow, Mr. Wolston,” the boatswain replied. “If the
boat were to capsize there wouldn’t be any to–morrow for us; and while
there is a to–morrow——”</p><p>“John Block is right,” his young companion answered. “We must not give
up hope, James! Whatever danger threatens us, we are in God’s hands, to
dispose of as He thinks fit. His hand is in all that comes to us, and it
is not right to say that He has withdrawn it from us.”</p><p>“I know,” James whispered, drooping his head, “but one is not always
master of one’s self.”</p><p>Another passenger, a man of about thirty, one of those who had been
sitting in the bows, approached John Block and said:</p><p>“Bo’sun, since our unfortunate captain was thrown into this boat with
us—and that is a week ago already—it is you who have taken his place. So
our lives are in your hands. Have you any hope?”</p><p>“Have I any hope?” John Block replied. “Yes! I assure you I have. I hope
these infernal calms will come to an end shortly and that the wind will
take us safe to harbour.”</p><p>“Safe to harbour?” the passenger answered, his eyes trying to pierce the
darkness of the night.</p><p>“Well, what the deuce!” John Block exclaimed. “There is a harbour
somewhere! All we have to do is to steer for it, with the wind whistling
through the yards. Good Lord! If I were the Creator I would show you
half a dozen islands lying all round us, waiting our convenience!”</p><p>“We won’t ask for as many as that, bo’sun,” the passenger replied,
unable to refrain from smiling.</p><p>“Well,” John Block answered, “if He will drive our boat towards one of
those which exist already, it will be enough, and He need not make any
islands on purpose, although, I must say, He seems to have been a bit
stingy with them hereabouts!”</p><p>“But where are we?”</p><p>“I can’t tell you, not even within a few hundred miles,” John Block
replied. “You know that for a whole long week we were shut up in the
hold, unable to see what course the ship was shaping, whether south or
north. Anyhow, it must have been blowing steadily, and the sea did
plenty of rolling and chopping.”</p><p>“That is true, John Block, and true, too, that we must have gone a long
way; but in what direction?”</p><p>“About that I don’t know anything,” the boatswain declared. “Did the
ship go off to the Pacific, instead of making for the Indian Ocean? On
the day of the mutiny we were off Madagascar. But since then, as the
wind has blown from the west all the time, we may have been taken
hundreds of miles from there, towards the islands of Saint Paul and
Amsterdam.”</p><p>“Where there are none but savages of the worst possible sort,” James
Wolston remarked. “But after all, the men who cast us away are not much
better.”</p><p>“One thing is certain,” John Block declared; “that wretch Borupt must
have altered the <span class="emphasis"><em>Flag’s</em></span> course and made for waters where he will be
most likely to escape punishment, and where he and his gang will play
pirates! So I think that we were a long way out of our proper course
when this boat was cut adrift. But I wish we might strike some island in
these seas—even a desert island would do! We could live all right by
hunting and fishing; we should find shelter in some cave. Why shouldn’t
we make of our island what the survivors of the <span class="emphasis"><em>Landlord</em></span> made of New
Switzerland? With strong arms, brains, and pluck——”</p><p>“Very true,” James Wolston answered, “but the <span class="emphasis"><em>Landlord</em></span> did not fail
her passengers. They were able to save her cargo, while we shall never
have anything from the <span class="emphasis"><em>Flag’s</em></span> cargo.”</p><p>The conversation was interrupted. A voice that rang with pain was heard:</p><p>“Drink! Give me something to drink!”</p><p>“It’s Captain Gould,” one of the passengers said. “He is eaten up with
fever. Luckily there is plenty of water, and——”</p><p>“That’s my job,” said the boatswain. “Do one of you take the tiller. I
know where the can is, and a few mouthfuls will give the captain ease.”</p><p>And John Block left his seat aft and went forward into the bows of the
boat.</p><p>The three other passengers remained in silence, awaiting his return.</p><p>After being away for two or three minutes John Block came back to his
post.</p><p>“Well?” someone enquired.</p><p>“Someone got there before me,” John Block answered. “One of our good
angels was with the patient already, pouring a little fresh water
between his lips, and bathing his forehead that was wet with sweat. I
don’t know whether Captain Gould was conscious. He seemed to be
delirious. He was talking about land. ‘The land ought to be over there,’
he kept saying, and his hand was wobbling about like the pennon on the
mainmast when all winds are blowing at once. I answered: ‘Ay, ay,
captain, quite so. The land is somewhere! We shall reach it soon. I can
smell it, to northwards.’ And that is a sure thing. We old sailors can
smell land like that. And I said too: ‘Don’t be uneasy, captain,
everything is all right. We have a stout boat and I will keep her course
steady. There must be more islands hereabouts than we could know what to
do with. Too many to choose from! We shall find one to suit our
convenience—an inhabited island where we shall find a welcome and where
we shall be sent home from.’ The poor chap understood what I said, I am
sure, and when I held the lantern near his face he smiled to me—such a
sad smile!—and at the good angel too. Then he closed his eyes again, and
fell asleep almost at once. Well! I may have lied pretty heavily when I
talked about land to him as if it were only a few miles off, but was I
far wrong?”</p><p>“No, Block,” the youngest passenger replied; “that is the kind of lie
that God allows.”</p><p>The conversation ended, and the silence was only broken thereafter by
the flapping of the sail against the mast as the boat rolled from one
side to the other. Most of those who were aboard her, broken down by
fatigue and weakened by long privation, forgot their terrors in heavy
sleep.</p><p>Although these unhappy people still had something wherewith to quench
their thirst, they would have nothing wherewith to appease their hunger
in the coming days. Of the few pounds of salt meat that had been flung
into the boat when she was pushed off, nothing now remained. They were
reduced to one bag of sea–biscuits for eleven people. How could they
manage, if the calm persisted? And for the last forty–eight hours not
one breath of breeze had stolen through the stifling atmosphere, not
even one of those intermittent gusts which are like the last sighs of a
dying man. It meant death by starvation, and that within a short time.</p><p>There was no steam navigation in those days. So the probability was
that, in the absence of wind, no ship would come into sight, and, in the
absence of wind, the boat could not reach land, whether island or
continent.</p><p>It was necessary to have perfect faith in God to combat utter despair,
or else to possess the unshakeable philosophy of the boatswain, which
consisted in refusing to see any but the bright side of things. Even now
he muttered to himself:</p><p>“Ay, ay, I know; the time will come when the last biscuit will have been
eaten; but as long as one can keep one’s stomach one mustn’t grumble,
even if there is nothing to put in it! Now, if one hadn’t got a stomach
left, even if there were plenty to put in it—that would be really
serious!”</p><p>Two hours passed. The boat had not moved a cable’s length, for there was
only the motion of the swell to affect her. Now the swell does not move
forward; it merely makes the surface of the water undulate. A few chips
of wood that had been thrown over the side the day before were still
floating close by, and the sail had not filled once to move the boat
away from them.</p><p>While merely afloat like this, it was little use to remain at the helm.
But the boatswain declined to leave his post. With the tiller under his
arm, he tried at least to avoid the lurching which tilted the boat to
one side and another, and thus to spare his companions excessive
shaking.</p><p>It was about three o’clock in the morning when John Block felt a light
breath pass across his cheeks, roughened and hardened as they were by
the salt sea air.</p><p>“Can the wind be getting up?” he murmured as he rose.</p><p>He turned towards the south, and wetting his finger in his mouth, held
it up. There was a distinct sensation of coldness, caused by the
evaporation, and now a distant rippling sound became audible.</p><p>He turned to the passenger sitting on the middle bench, near one of the
women.</p><p>“Mr. Fritz!” he said.</p><p>Fritz Robinson raised his head and bent round.</p><p>“What do you want, bo’sun?” he asked.</p><p>“Look over there—towards the east.”</p><p>“What do you think you see?”</p><p>“If I’m not mistaken, a kind of rift, like a belt, on the water–line.”</p><p>Unmistakably there was a lighter line along the horizon in that
direction. Sky and sea could be distinguished with more definiteness. It
was as if a rent had just been made in the dome of mist and vapour.</p><p>“It’s wind!” the boatswain declared.</p><p>“Isn’t it only the first beginning of daybreak?” the passenger asked.</p><p>“It might be daylight, though it’s very early for it,” John Block
replied, “and again it might be a breeze! I felt something of it in my
beard just now, and look!—it’s twitching still! I’m aware it’s not a
breeze to fill the top–gallant sails, but anyhow it’s more than we’ve
had for the last four and twenty hours. Put your hand to your ear, Mr.
Fritz, and listen; you’ll hear what I heard.”</p><p>“You are right,” said the passenger, leaning over the gunwale; “it is
the breeze.”</p><p>“And we’re ready for it,” the boatswain replied, “with the foresail
block and tackle. We’ve only got to haul the sheet taut to save all the
wind which is rising.”</p><p>“But where will it take us?”</p><p>“Wherever it likes,” the boatswain answered; “all I want it to do is to
blow us out of these cursed waters!”</p><p>Twenty minutes went by. The breath of wind, which at first was almost
imperceptible, grew stronger. The rippling aft became louder. The boat
made a few rougher motions, not caused by the slow, nauseating swell.
Folds of the sail spread out, fell flat, and opened again, and the sheet
sagged against its cleats. The wind was not strong enough yet to fill
the heavy canvas of the foresail and the jib. Patience was needed, while
the boat’s head was kept to her course as well as might be by means of
one of the sculls.</p><p>A quarter of an hour later, progress was marked by a light wake.</p><p>Just at this moment one of the passengers who had been lying in the bows
got up and looked at the rift in the clouds to the eastward.</p><p>“Is it a breeze?” he asked.</p><p>“Yes,” John Block answered. “I think we have got it this time, like a
bird in the hand—and we won’t let go of it!”</p><p>The wind was beginning to spread steadily now through the rift, through
which, too, the first gleams of light must come. From south–east to
south–west, the clouds still hung in heavy masses, over three–quarters
of the circumference of the sky. It was still impossible to see more
than a few cables’ lengths from the boat, and beyond that distance no
ship could have been detected.</p><p>As the breeze had freshened, the sheet had to be hauled in, the
foresail, whose gear was slackened, hoisted, and the course veered a
point or two, so as to give the jib a hold on the wind.</p><p>“We’ve got it; we’ve got it!” the boatswain said cheerily, and the boat,
heeling gently over to starboard, dipped her nose into the first waves.</p><p>Little by little the rent in the clouds grew bigger and spread overhead.
The sky assumed a reddish hue. It seemed that the wind might hold to the
present quarter for some little time, and that the period of calms had
come to an end.</p><p>Hope of reaching land revived once more, or the alternative hope of
falling in with a ship.</p><p>At five o’clock the rent in the clouds was ringed with a collar of vivid
coloured clouds. It was the day, appearing with the suddenness peculiar
to the low latitudes of the tropical regions. Soon purple rays of light
arose above the horizon, like the sticks of a fan. The rim of the solar
disc, heightened by the refraction, touched the horizon line, drawn
clearly now at the end of sky and sea. At once the rays of light caught
on the little clouds which hung in the high heaven, and dyed them every
shade of crimson. But they were stubbornly arrested by the dense vapours
accumulated in the north, and could not break through them. And so the
range of vision, long behind, was still extremely limited in front. The
boat was leaving a long wake behind her now, marked in creamy white upon
the greenish water.</p><p>And now the whole sun emerged above the horizon, enormously magnified at
its diameter. No haze dimmed its brilliance, which was insupportable to
the eye. All aboard the boat looked away from it; they only scanned the
north, whither the wind was carrying them. The main question was what
the fog screened from them in that direction.</p><p>At length, just before half–past six, one of the passengers seized the
halyards of the foresail and clambered nimbly up to the yardarm, just as
the sun cleared the sky to the eastward with its early rays.</p><p>And in a ringing voice he shouted:</p><p>“Land!”</p></section><footer/></body></html>