<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter XVI</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch15.xhtml" title="Chapter XV"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter XVI" epub:type="chapter" id="id1020"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter XVI</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>Conclusion</em></h3></div></div></div><p>It actually was the <span class="emphasis"><em>Unicorn</em></span> which had just dropped anchor at the mouth
of Deliverance Bay. All the repairs effected, Captain Littlestone had
left Cape Town after a stay of several months, and at last had reached
New Switzerland, of which he was to take official possession in the name
of England.</p><p>Captain Littlestone now learned from Captain Gould’s lips the events of
which the <span class="emphasis"><em>Flag</em></span> had been the stage.</p><p>As for what had become of that vessel, whether Robert Borupt was playing
pirate in the ill–famed waters of the Pacific, or whether he and his
accomplices had perished in some furious tornado was destined never to
be known, and was of little consequence to the islanders.</p><p>It was an immense satisfaction to the two families when they found that
the dwelling at Rock Castle had not been sacked. The natives had
probably contemplated taking up their quarters there, intending to
settle on the island. There was no damage done to the bedrooms or halls,
no sign of pillage in the out–houses or stores, no havoc in the orchard
or adjoining fields.</p><p>They recovered all the domestic animals which had scattered in the
neighbourhood, the buffaloes Storm and Grumbler, the ostrich Whirlwind,
the monkey Nip, the onager Lightfoot, the cow Paleface and her meadow
companions, the bull Roarer and his stable companions, the asses Swift,
Arrow, and Dart, the jackal, and Jenny’s albatross, which had flown
across the arm of the sea between Shark’s Island and Rock Castle.</p><p>As it could not be very long before several ships despatched from
England would arrive with colonists and their stores, it became
necessary to choose the site for new buildings. It was decided that
these should be erected along the banks of Jackal River, up towards the
fall. Rock Castle would thus be the first village of the colony, pending
the time when it should have grown into a town. No doubt in the future
it would rank as the capital of New Switzerland, for it would be the
most important of the little towns which would grow up in the heart of
the Promised Land, and beyond.</p><p>The <span class="emphasis"><em>Unicorn</em></span> was under orders to remain in Deliverance Bay until the
emigrants arrived. So animation reigned along the coast from Falconhurst
beach.</p><p>Three weeks had not elapsed before a ceremony, which it was agreed to
make as brilliant as possible, brought together Commander Littlestone
and the officers and crew of his ship, Captain Harry Gould and the
boatswain, and all the members of the Zermatt and Wolston families, now
to be united to one another in still closer bonds.</p><p>On that day the chaplain of the <span class="emphasis"><em>Unicorn</em></span> celebrated in the chapel of
Rock Castle the marriage of Ernest Zermatt and Hannah Wolston. It was
the first wedding on the island of New Switzerland, but the future would
no doubt see it followed by many others.</p><p>And, in point of fact, two years later, Frank became the husband of
Dolly Wolston. On this occasion it was not in the humble chapel that the
pastor of the colony gave his blessing to the happy pair. The ceremony
was held in a church erected midway between Rock Castle and Falconhurst,
in the avenue. The steeple, rising above the trees, was visible three
miles out to sea.</p><p>No need to dilate further upon the progress of New Switzerland! The
fortunate isle saw the number of its inhabitants increasing every year.
Deliverance Bay, well protected from the winds and waves, offered
excellent anchorage for ships, and among these the pinnace <span class="emphasis"><em>Elizabeth</em></span>
cut no bad figure.</p><p>Regular communication with England was established. This inaugurated a
most profitable export trade. By that time there were four more
villages, Wood Grange, Sugar–cane Grove, Eberfurt, and Prospect Hill. A
harbour was made at the mouth of the Montrose River, and another at
Unicorn Bay, the latter connected with Deliverance Bay by a good
carriage road.</p><p>Three years after New Switzerland had been taken possession of by
England her population exceeded two thousand. The British government had
left the colony her autonomy, and M. Zermatt was elected to the position
of Governor of New Switzerland. Heaven grant that his successors may be
as good as that excellent and worthy man!</p><p>A detachment of troops from India garrisoned the island after
fortifications had been constructed at Cape East and Cape Deliverance
(formerly known as False Hope Point), so as to command the arm of the
sea which gave access to Deliverance Bay.</p><p>Of course, this had nothing to do with any fear of savages, neither
those of the Andamans and Nicobars, nor those of the Australian coast.
But New Switzerland’s position in these waters, besides offering
excellent anchorage for ships, was of real importance from a strategic
point of view at the entrance to the Sunda Seas and the Indian Ocean. It
was only proper, therefore, that it should be provided with means of
defence.</p><p>Such is the complete history of this island from the day when a storm
cast a father, mother and four children upon it. For twelve years that
brave and intelligent family worked without ceasing, and set in
operation all the energy of a virgin soil, which was rendered fruitful
by the magic climate of the tropic regions. And so their prosperity had
never ceased to grow nor their welfare to be increased, until the day
when the arrival of the <span class="emphasis"><em>Unicorn</em></span> enabled them to establish relations
with the rest of the world.</p><p>As has been related, a second family voluntarily threw in its fortune
with theirs, and materially and morally existence was never happier than
in the fertile domain of the Promised Land.</p><p>Then began a period of severe trial. Ill fortune fell upon these good
people. They knew the fear of never seeing again those for whom they
were waiting, and the peril of being attacked by a horde of savages!</p><p>But even in the darkest hours of that unhappy time they never lost faith
in Providence.</p><p>Then at last bright days returned, and never again are dark ones to be
feared for the second fatherland of the two families.</p><p>And now New Switzerland is flourishing and will soon be too small to
receive all those who are attracted to her. Her commerce is finding
outlets in Europe as well as in Asia, thanks to the proximity of
Australia, India, and the Netherlands possessions. Most fortunately the
nuggets found in the gorge by the Montrose River proved to be very rare,
and the colony was not invaded by gold–seekers, who usually leave
nothing but disorder and misery in their train!</p><p>The marriages which united the Zermatt and Wolston families have been
blessed by Heaven. The grandparents will soon feel that they live again
in their grandchildren. Only Jack is content with the nephews and nieces
who clamber on his knees. He said he was a born uncle, and in that
relation was certainly a great success.</p><p>Though the island now forms part of the colonial dominions of Great
Britain, it has been allowed to retain its name of New Switzerland in
honour of the Zermatt family.</p></section><footer/></body></html>