<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Translator’s Note</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="index.xhtml" title="The Castaways of the Flag"/><link rel="next" href="pr02.xhtml" title="Preface"/></head><body><header/><section class="preface" title="Translator’s Note" epub:type="preface" id="id680"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Translator’s Note</h1></div></div></div><p>With the restoration of Fritz Zermatt and his wife Jenny, his brother
Frank and the other Castaways of the Flag to their anxious and sorely
tried relatives in New Switzerland, the story of “The Swiss Family
Robinson” is brought to its proper end. Thereafter, the interest of
their domestic life is merged in that of the growth of a young colony.
Romance is merged in history and the romancer’s work is finished. Jules
Verne has here set the coping stone on the structure begun by Rudolph
Wyss, and in “The Swiss Family Robinson,” “Their Island Home” and “The
Castaways of the Flag” we have, not a story and two sequels, but a
complete trilogy which judges who survey it must pronounce very good.</p><p>A word may be permitted about this English version. Jules Verne is a
master of pure narrative. His style is singularly limpid and his
language is so simple that people with a very limited knowledge of
French can read his stories in the original and miss very little of
their substance. But to be able to read a book in one language and to
translate it into another are very different things. The very simplicity
of Jules Verne’s French presents difficulties to one who would translate
it into English. What the French call “idiotismes” abound in all Verne’s
writing, and I know few French authors to whose books it is so difficult
to impart a really English air in English dress. Whatever the
imperfections of these translations may be they cannot, however, mar
very greatly the pleasure the stories themselves give to every reader.</p><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>Cranstoun Metcalfe.</p></blockquote></div></section><footer/></body></html>