<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Preface</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="pr01.xhtml" title="Translator’s Note"/><link rel="next" href="ch01.xhtml" title="Chapter I"/></head><body><header/><section class="preface" title="Preface" epub:type="preface" id="id700"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Preface</h1></div></div></div><p>This story is a sequel to “Their Island Home,” which takes up the
adventures of the Swiss Family Robinson at the place where the author of
the original narrative dropped them.</p><p>“The Swiss Family Robinson” seems to have affected Jules Verne’s
literary bent as no other book ever did. It gave him that liking for the
lonely island life as the basis of a yarn which is conspicuous in much
of his work. In a preface to the story of which this is really a part he
tells how firmly New Switzerland established itself in the fabric of his
thoughts, till it became for him a real island inhabited by real people.
At last he was compelled to write about it, and “Their Island Home” and
“The Castaways of the Flag” are the result.</p><p>The youth of Europe—many generations of it—owes a big debt to the old
romancer who worked for so many years in his turret room at Amiens to
entertain it. From that room, with its many bookshelves, came volume
after volume of adventure, mostly with a big admixture of the
scientific. M. Verne was not one of those who pile hairbreadth escapes
one upon another till they become incredible. There are plenty of things
happening in his books, but they are the sort of things that would
happen, given the circumstances, and he explains why and how they
chanced in the most convincing manner possible. In these days of
submarines and aeroplanes it is interesting to read again the wonderful
Frenchman’s forecast of them in such books as “Twenty Thousand Leagues
under the Sea” and “The Clipper of the Clouds.” “Round the World in
Eighty Days”—the task would be an easy one now, but at the time when he
wrote it required great ingenuity to make it seem possible; and the end
of that book is one of the most ingenious things in fiction, though it
has for justification a simple geographical fact. Phineas Fogg was a day
late, as he believed. He had apparently lost his wager. But, having gone
round the world in the right direction, he had gained a day, and just
won. If he had gone the other way he would have been two days late, for
a day would have been lost to him—cut right out of the calendar!</p><p>The cryptogram which forms the main feature of “The Giant Raft”—the
deflection of the compass in “Dick Sands,” which causes the people on
the ship of which Dick had to take command to reach the coast of Africa,
while believing that they had landed on the American continent—the
device of the millionaire in “Godfrey Morgan,” which provided an island
with beasts of prey not native to it—the gigantic projectile which
carried those intrepid voyagers to the moon and round it—the reaching of
the interior of the earth by a road down the crater of one volcano and
the return to the surface up the crater of another—these are
imaginations not readily forgotten. And the other stories—“Five Weeks in
a Balloon,” “The Adventures of Three Englishmen and Three Russians,”
“The Tribulations of a Chinaman,” the yarns dealing with the Indian
Mutiny, “Michael Strogoff the Courier of the Czar,” and the rest—how
entrancing they were, and still are to a boy, or a man with something of
the boy yet in him!</p><div class="blockquote"><blockquote class="blockquote"><p>“THEIR ISLAND HOME.”</p></blockquote></div><p>Readers of the present book who have not read that named above—though
all should read it as well as this—will have no difficulty in joining
the story of the castaways to “The Swiss Family Robinson” with the help
of the brief sketch of its contents which follows.</p><p>The story begins with the arrival of the <span class="emphasis"><em>Unicorn</em></span>, a British corvette
commanded by Lieutenant Littlestone, whose commission includes the
exploration of the waters in which New Switzerland is situate. He has
with him as passengers Mr. and Mrs. Wolston and their daughters Hannah
and Dolly.</p><p>When the <span class="emphasis"><em>Unicorn</em></span> weighs anchor again Mr. Wolston and his wife and
their elder daughter, Hannah, remain on the island. But the corvette
takes away Fritz and Frank Zermatt and Jenny Montrose, who are all bound
for England, where Jenny hopes to find her father, Colonel Montrose, and
the two young men have much business to transact, and Dolly Wolston, who
is to join her brother James—a married man with one child—at Cape Town.
Mr. Wolston hopes that James, with his wife and child, will agree to
accompany Dolly and the Zermatts—by the time they return Jenny will have
become Mrs. Fritz Zermatt—to the island and take up their abode there.</p><p>The <span class="emphasis"><em>Unicorn</em></span> gone, those left behind settle themselves down to await
her return, labouring meanwhile to make ready the island against the
possibility of a number of immigrants. One of their first improvements
is a canal for irrigation purposes. Mr. Wolston, a skilful engineer, and
Ernest, clever and thoughtful, reader of many books and with a distinct
scientific bent, are quite capable of planning such things as this.</p><p>There are seven people left on the island—M. and Mme. Zermatt, Mr. and
Mrs. Wolston, Jack Zermatt, adventurous and keen on sport, Ernest, and
the charming Hannah. Between these last two a strong affection develops.
The brothers, very unlike in nature, have little in common, but are good
friends in spite of that fact; and the whole seven form practically one
united and very happy family.</p><p>Only a small part of the island has ever been really explored during the
ten years the Zermatts have been there. They now determine to find out
more about it. In their pinnace, the <span class="emphasis"><em>Elizabeth</em></span>, they voyage to a
hitherto unknown coast, and, after a very arid stretch, find the mouth
of a river, capable of floating the pinnace. They christen this the
Montrose, in compliment to Jenny.</p><p>To the south they see a great mountain range. In order to get as near
this as possible Mr. Wolston and Ernest make a canoe trip up the
Montrose, but are stopped at length by rapids and a great natural dam.</p><p>They all return to Rock Castle and face the dull days of the rainy
season, which proves more stormy than usual, and does some damage to
their possessions elsewhere than at Rock Castle. That season over, they
make preparations for another expedition—this time wholly by land, and
made by Mr. Wolston, Jack, and Ernest only, M. Zermatt remaining with
the three ladies.</p><p>The three are determined to reach the topmost peak of the mountain
range, and after some considerable difficulty they achieve their object.
They plant the British flag there, Lieut. Littlestone having
provisionally taken possession of the island in Great Britain’s name,
and they christen the mountain crest Jean Zermatt Peak. From it they
discern out at sea a ship flying the British colours. But she
disappears, to their intense disappointment.</p><p>At Rock Castle those left behind grow anxious when the time the
explorers had expected to be away lengthens itself by several days. Then
Mr. Wolston and Ernest turn up—without Jack.</p><p>That adventurous young man has wandered off after three elephants, in
the hope of capturing and taming the calf after killing the father and
mother. They have searched in vain for him, and are almost forced to the
conclusion that something tragic must have happened.</p><p>But Jack turns up, safe and sound. He has, however, an alarming tale to
tell. It would seem that their days of peace on the island are numbered.
He has been captured by savages, and, though he has escaped by adroit
courage, all know that the chance of the savages finding the Promised
Land is one with which they must reckon.</p><p>The <span class="emphasis"><em>Unicorn</em></span> is now past the time appointed for her return, and the
seven have thus a double reason for anxiety.</p><p>Here “Their Island Home” finishes, and in the present book may be read
what came of it all, and in what way they emerged from heavy trouble
into peace and prosperity even greater than of old.</p></section><footer/></body></html>